=== PAGE 1 ===
# Predictions

## MAY IN THE YEAR 1978

**Apr. 29** Indoor star party, Los Gatos Red Cross, 7:00 pm.

**May 2** Sun Day, Rosicrucian Planetarium, see Blurb section for more information.

**May 5&6** AANC star party at Fremont Peak. West Valley College Astronomy classes will be there.

**May 6** Club star party at Henry Coe Park, dusk to dawn.

**May 12** Board of Directors Meeting, 8:00 pm. Dr. Gregory's, 5480 Fairway Dr. San Jose.

**May 13** General Meeting, Rosicrucian Planetarium, Park and Naglee, San Jose. Lori Warren will give a planetarium orientation and show the currently running program about Ancient Egypt.

**May 20** Indoor star party, Los Gatos Red Cross, 7:00 pm.

**May 27** Indoor star party, Los Gatos Red Cross, 7:00 pm.

**May 27-29** Riverside Telescope Makers Conference, Big Bear. For more information, ask Jack Zeiders or Gerry Rattley.

**Jun. 2&3** Club and AANC sponsored star party at Fremont Peak State Park.

**Jun. 10** Indoor star party, Los Gatos Red Cross, 7:00 pm.

**Jun. 17** General Meeting, Rosicrucian Planetarium, Park and Naglee, San Jose. Speaker to be announced. Election night.

**Jun. 23** Board of Directors Meeting, 8:00 pm. Jack Zeiders' house, 725 Minnesota Av. San Jose.

**Jun. 30&31** AANC sponored star party at Fremont Peak.

---

**John Rhodes, President 969 2615    Penny Pinschmidt, Editor 356 4330**

---

*The San Jose Astronomical Association*

=== PAGE 2 ===
# Rambling Rhodes

As announced in the PREDICTIONS section, this month's meeting will be held at the Rosecrucian Planetarium building in San Jose. The move is the result of several months planning and coordinating spearheaded by Gerry Rattley, and we are all pretty excited about the prospects.

The board has for some months wanted to build a relationship between the SJAA and some respected institution in the greater San Jose area. Our dream was to find an organization which could provide us with a meeting place, and which would benefit from our enthusiastic programs in astronomy. Our first attempt at such a coupling was with the University of Santa Clara -- their fine telescope and observatory building seemed ideal for a mutually benefical program. Unfortunately, the funds were not available at the University to staff the facility properly, so our plan went begging.

Then Gerry talked with Don and Lori Warren at the Rosecrucian. Our proposal to use the planetarium as the meeting room was warmly welcomed, and we have already begun to see the benefits of the association: Astronomy Day was a resounding success, with the planetarium shows and the SJAA telescopes complementing one another. This coming meeting will feature Lori Warren presenting the planetarium projector and giving us their currently featured show. In addition, the Rosecrucian organization is well known within the south bay area and has effective contacts with the local news media. They are members of the AANC and have a good understanding of astronomical phenomenon and their potential influence on SJAA activities and requirements.

Use of the Rosecrucian planetarium did however require another change: The planetarium is not available to the SJAA on Friday evenings since that evening is reserved for public shows. A straw poll of the membership suggested that Saturday evening would be preferred to a week night, so that evening was designated by the board for the new general meeting night. In addition, since we were already confusing everyone by changing the place and the day, we have also instituted one more change. The meeting night will NOT necessarily be the first Saturday of the month; the Saturday selected will be one which most closely corresponds to the Saturday following the 1st-quarter moon. This rule prevents the annoying (and often protracted) conflict between general meeting nights and evenings of prime-time viewing.

The meeting nights will always be scheduled definitely 3 months in advance -- and published in the BULLETIN. In addition, our club "Keeper of the Calendar" (currently Jim Van Nuland) will prepare a pro forma calendar one year in advance for you long-range planners.

The new meeting-night schedule should be a boon to those active members who have been waiting this long winter out looking for a clear night; it also follows the format set long ago by some of the East Coast astronomy clubs. See you at the Planetarium.

John Rhodes - April 1978

=== PAGE 3 ===
# DIRECTIONS TO FREMONT PEAK STATE PARK

GO SOUTH ON HIWAY 101 FROM GILROY - TAKE HIWAY 156 EAST TO SAN JUAN BAUTISTA - AT THE FLASHING YELLOW LIGHT TURN RIGHT AND FOLLOW THE SIGNS ALL THE WAY UP THE HILL. THE PARK IS AT THE VERY END OF THE ROAD. BE CAREFUL

---

## DIRECTIONS TO DR. GREGORY'S HOME FOR THE MAY BOARD MEETING, MAY 12 FRIDAY AT 8:00 pm.

GO EAST ON ALUM ROCK AVE. FROM 680 - JUST A FEW BLOCKS BEFORE MOUNT HAMILTON ROAD, TURN LEFT (NORTH) ON McKEE ROAD AND GO ABOUT 3 BLOCKS, THEN TURN RIGHT ON FAIRWAY - DR. GREGORY'S IS SOMEWHAT MORE THAN A BLOCK UP ON THE RIGHT.

5480 FAIRWAY DR.
SAN JOSE

YOU COULD ALSO COME IN FROM THE FREEWAY ON McKEE ROAD

---

### MAP TO ROSICRUCIAN PLANETARIUM MAY GENERAL MEETING
MAY 13, 1978
**✱ SATURDAY ✱**
**7:30pm**

**CHANGED AT THE LAST BOARD MEETING**

[Map showing streets and intersections including:]
- AIR PORT
- HIWAY 17
- PENN. RR. CROSS
- HEDDING
- TAYLOR
- COLEMAN
- RANDOL
- ALAMEDA
- CHAPMAN PARK
- WALLER
- BASCOM
- ROSICRUCIAN PLANETARIUM
- STEVENS CREEK
- SAN CARLOS
- RACE

=== PAGE 4 ===
# AD AD AD AD

**Wanted: reporters, good writers willing to write for the bulletin.**

You, yes, you can actually be published in your famous club bulletin. All you need is imagination and the willingness to do something good for someone (mainly me, as well as your fellow club members.) I need people to write about star parties, interesting Red Cross events, guest editorials, astronomical news past and present, stories about active club members, even astronomical word games or crossword puzzles! Almost anything will be okay, but nothing won't. So, please, write something for the bulletin.

---

Here are some of the more usable quotes, most of which are from the last board meeting on April 14th.

"Jack has a neat way of phrasing things, doesn't he?" John Rhodes

"We'll do anything for the sake of an argument." Jack Zeiders

"Those of you who think you know everything get in the way of those of us who do." Ed Schell

"This is a zoo." John Rhodes

"4565 doesn't look so good on an egg." Gerry Rattley

"Ed is actually good at something." Jack Zeiders

---

## Red Spot Predictions

The Spot is tracking close to the predictions, mostly gray or light yellow, not hard to detect if seeing is very good. These are the last tinings to be published for this apparition. Recovery will be attempted in August.

Great Red Spot on Meridian PDT

| Da Mo | d | h | m |
|-------|---|---|-------|
| M | 5 | 1 | 10 15 PM |
| Sat | 5 | 6 | 9 17 PM |
| Th | 5 18 | 9 23 PM |

## For Sale...

DOAA model AD drive corrector. 120 VAC and 12 VDC power, variable rate 50-70 Hz, 10 watts output. With cigarette lighter plug or battery clips (your choice). With plain or stretch cord (your choice). Good condition. $45. Jim Van Nuland, 371-1307.

*Jim Van Nuland.*

=== PAGE 5 ===
# Rattley Rattles

## The Finest Deep Sky Objects on the Skalnate Pleso Atlas of the Heavens Chart I

**NGC 40** RA (1950) dec Con SP:mag,size,type,dist  
00 10.2 +72 15 Cep pn:10(*11‡):I:Oxo:e:IIIb:1000pc  
H.IV 58: Faint,very Small,Round,very suddenly much brighter in the Middle, star of mag 12 south preceding: use moderate power to locate and high power to observe; central star visable?; like a tiny M.97!

**129** 00 27.0 +59 57 Cas oc:10:11'-50*:e:2000pc  
H.VIII 79: Cluster,very Large,pretty Round,a little Compressed,stars from mag 9 to 13: use low power; a little hidden in rich Milky Way region; bright double star 81094(6&9:0'!7:254':'48) south following the cluster.

**188** 00 38.4 +85 03 Cep oc:9‡:15'-70*:c:10500pc  
Cluster,very Large,Round,Rich,stars from mag 10 to 18: use low power; oldest known cluster; a little faint but not to difficult.

**225** 00 40.5 +61 31 Cas oc:9:12'-20*:(d):520pc  
H.VIII 78: Cluster,Large,a little Compressed,stars from mag 9 to 10: use low power; bright easy cluster; somewhat "W" shaped.

**381** 01 05.2 +61 18 Cas oc:9‡:8'-30*:(e):2780pc  
H.VIII 64: Cluster,pretty Compressed: use low power; large, irregularly round blaze in the Milky Way.

**559** 01 26.1 +63 02 Cas oc:7‡:7'-60*:e:2750pc  
H.VII 48: Cluster,Bright,pretty Large,pretty Rich: use low and moderate powers; stars very small; magnificent when viewed in dark skies!

**581** 01 28.9 +60 27 Cas oc:7:5'-60*:d:1150pc  
M.103: Cluster,pretty Large,Bright,Round,Rich,stars from mag 10 to 11: use low and moderate power; the brighter stars form a fan-shape; contains Σ131(7&10:14&':14":':56:y&b1) and a red star.

**654** 01 40.5 +61 39 Cas oc:9‡:5'-50*:d:1150pc  
HVII 46: Cluster,irregular Figure,Rich,stars from mag 11 to 14: use low and moderate powers; triangular shaped blaze of very small stars!

**663** 01 42.6 +61 01 Cas oc:7‡:11'-80*:e:790pc  
H.VI 31: Cluster,Bright,Large,extremely Rich,stars pretty Large: use low power; several double stars involved; fine binocular object!

**1027** 02 38.8 +61 20 Cas oc:7‡:7'-11*:d:1150pc  
H.VIII 66: Cluster,Large,scattered stars: gn I.C.1805 1° preceding; gn I.C.1848 2° south following; use lowest power.

**I.C.342** 03 41.9 +67 57 Cam eg:11‡:14'x11':Sc: -  
pretty Faint,Large,Round,gradually brighter in the Middle,Nucleus, between two pretty Bright stars: large broadside Spiral just outside the local group; use low power and dark skies!

**2403** 07 32.0 +65 43 Cam eg:9:16'8x10'0:Sc:2Mpc  
H.V 44: a very Remarkable object,considerably Bright,extremely Large, very much Elongated,very gradually much brighter in the Middle,Nucleus: large, bright Spiral: among several pretty bright stars; use low power.

**2655** 08 49.4 +78 25 Cam eg:11:5'0x3'4:S:5Mpc'  
H.I 288: very Bright,considerably Large,a little Elongated in P.A.90°, gradual,then suddenly very much brighter in the Middle: 7‡ mag star close following; use low and moderate power.

**2976** 09 43.2 +68 08 UMa eg:11‡:3'5x1'3:S:2Mpc  
H.I 285: Bright,very Large,much Elongated in P.A.152°,star involved: use low power; 1‡° south preceding M.81.

=== PAGE 6 ===
# Rattley Rattles On . . .

## Finest Skalnate Pleso Objects - Chart I, continued

**NGC RA (1950) dec Con SP:mag,size,type,dist**

**2985** 09 46.0 +72 31 UMa eg:10½:5:5x5!0:Sb:14½Mpc
H.I 78: very Bright,considerably Large,Round,pretty suddenly much brighter in the Middle,star involved on the following side: use low power.
3031 09 51.5 +69 18 UMa eg:8:21!0x9!8:Sb:2Mpc

M.81: Remarkable object,extremely Bright,extremely Large,Elongated in P.A.156°,gradual,then suddenly very much brighter in the Middle,Bright Nucleus: large, bright Spiral: use low power: binocular object!
3034 09 51.9 +69 56 UMa eg:9:9!0x4!0:Pec:2Mpc

M.82: H.IV 79: very Bright,very Large,very much Extended Ray: use low power; An Exploding Galaxy! radio source; 1" north of M.81.
3077 09 59.4 +68 58 UMa eg:11:2!3x1!9:E2p:2Mpc

H.I 286: considerably Bright,considerably Large,much brighter in the Middle, Round with ray: use low and-moderate power; 1" following M.81.
4125 12 05.7 +65 27 Dra eg:10½:2:2x1!1:E5p:15Mpc

Auwers 28: pretty Bright,pretty Large,considerably Elongated,much brighter in the Middle: use moderate; fine sight in dark skies!
4236 12 14.3 +69 45 Dra eg:12½:20!0x5!0:SB:2Mpc

H.V 51: very Faint,extremely Large,much Elongated in P.A.160°,very gradually brighter in the Middle: use lowest power & dark skies; rewarding when found!
4605 12 37.8 +61 53 UMa eg:10!5!0x1!2:S:2Mpc

H.I 254: Bright,Large,very much Elongated in P.A.120°,gradually a little brighter in the Middle: use low and moderate power.
5322 13 47.6 +60 26 UMa eg:10:1!4x1!1:E2:21Mpc

H.I 256: very Bright,pretty Large,irregularly Round,pretty suddenly much brighter in the Middle: use low power; fine, bright Elliptical!
6503 17 49.9 +70 10 Dra eg:10:4!5x!0!Sb:3Mpc

Auwers 37: pretty Faint,Large,much Elongated,9th mag star 4' following: use moderate power and a dark sky for a rewarding view of this Spiral!
6543 17 58.8 +66 38 Dra pn:9(*11):0!4x0!3:IIIa:520pc

H.IV 37: Planetary,very Bright,pretty Small,suddenly brighter in the Middle with a very Stellar Nucleus: "Draco Planetary"! blue-green shell with a smelt blue central star; use high power and good seeing!!
6939 20 30.4 +60 28 Cep oc:10!5!-80*:g:500pc

H.VI 42: Cluster,pretty Large,extremely Rich,pretty Compressed in the Middle,stars from mag 11 to 16: use low power; NGC 6946 south following.
6946 20 33.9 +69-58 Cvg: eg:10!9!0x7!5:Sc:3½Mpc

H.IV 76: very Faint,very Large,very gradual,then very suddenly brighter in the Middle,mottled: use low power; in rich Milky Way field.
7023 21 01.4 +67 58 Cep gn:-(*7):18!x18':280pc

H.IV 74: 7th mag star in extremely Faint,extremely Large nebulosity, particularly distinct north&south from the star: use low power&dark sky!
7142 21 44.7 +65 34 Cep oc:10!11!-35*:(d):2320pc

H.VII 66: Cluster,considerably Large,considerably Rich,pretty Compressed, stars from mag 11 to 14: use low power.
7510 23 09.2 +60 18 Cep oc:9:2'-27*:d:2750pc

H.VIII 44: Cluster,pretty Rich,pretty Compressed,fan-shaped,stars pretty Bright: use low and moderate power.
7635 23 18.5 +60 54 Cas pn:-(*9):3!4x3!0:V:520pc

H.IV 52: very Faint,8th mag star involved a little excentric: Difficult!!!
7654 23 22.0 +61 20 Cas oc:7½:12'-120*:e:1170pc

M.52: Cluster,Large,Rich,much Compressed in the Middle,Round,stars from mag 9 to 13: use low power; triangular shape; orange star.
7782 23 47.5 +67 44 Cep oc:10:10'-70*:d:4570pc

H.VII 55: Cluster,pretty Rich,pretty Compressed,stars from mag 11 to 15: use low power.

Dark Skies; *Kenneth W. Leavitt*

=== PAGE 7 ===
# Blurbs

The week of May 1 through 6 has been named Sun Week. On Tuesday, May 2, Sun Day, the Rosicrucian Planetarium will have telescopes set up between 2:00 and 6:00 p.m. Come if you can and bring your telescope if it has a sun filter or projection system. The planetarium will also have a show going on inside. For more information call Gerry Rattley.

A nominating committee was formed at the April 14th board meeting for the upcoming election in June. There will be 4 slots to fill on the board. The committee members are Cathy Pinheiro, Bob Fingerhut, Jim Van Nuland and Jack Zeiders. Have you thought about who you want for board members?

Dr. Gregory volunteered to be Banquet Chair(person) with John Rhodes and Jack Zeiders as assistants. If you have any suggestions as to a banquet site for our July meeting tell any of the above. The Board is looking at a cost range of about $7 per person.

Information about the Riverside Telescope Makers Conference on May 27-29 will be available at all Red Cross and General Meetings.

If anyone is interested in blinking (see last month's article by Jeff Lo) I have the questionnaire that needs to be filled out if you would like to blink. Please call me or get in touch with Jeff.

When Gerry Rattley was telling about his information on the Rosicrucian Planetarium at the last board meeting he was so enthusiastic that he even took off his cap!

## ANNOUNCEMENT

There may be some unannounced indoor star parties at the Los Gatos Red Cross. When the Board makes up its mind about General Meeting dates, indoor star parties will be scheduled every Saturday that something else isn't going on. If not sure, call Ed Schell.

---

[Comic strip image at bottom of page]

=== PAGE 8 ===
# History

On March 25th (Easter Eve) at the Red Cross, we had an astronomical egg decorating contest. Out of a dozen entries, Jeff Lo won. All on one little egg he managed to skillfully draw the never-ending scene of some poor fellow trying to look through his telescope with car headlights shining bright in his direction. Jeff walked away with all twelve eggs as his prize.

Nothing much happened at the first AANC sponsored star party at Fremont Peak. On Friday I was not there and neither were many others. Saturday afternoon I did hear from Les Delong that despite it being a-h-y-ool (37)°the seeing was halfway decent Friday night. Later, on Saturday, a bunch of us went to the site behind the ranger's house. I won't mention all the names, just a few, like Larry Webster, Pete Arenalo and friends, and last as well as least, Jack Zeiders. The big event happened around 1:00 a.m. on Sunday. Ed Schell happened to glance down into the valley and saw a raging fire in Hollister. It looked like half the town was burning. Pete swung his Questar around and we were able to watch the flames with it. The most exciting sight seen through the telescopes all night! Later that day, Ed and I detoured to Hollister on our way home. Found out it was only a warehouse or lumber yard on fire, not the whole town!

On April 11th there was an unannounced graze expedition down south of Gilroy. Jim Van Nuland, Gerry Rattley, Ed Schell and I were the only observers. Jim wasn't expecting much excitement; hence, no prior publicity. By 8:15 p.m. all was ready. At 8:30 all was over. Ed and I saw little through the 3" refractor, partly due to poor seeing. Jim and Gerry did better, but nothing earth shattering (or rather moon shattering.) If you want more details, ask Jim. I'm getting lazy and tempermental in my old age, so I won't say much more about it. Afterwards, all of us met at Jim's VW bus at his station on the side of the road. We talked, had hot drinks, and ate Gerry's Oreo cookies by the light of defective road flares that Ed had!

The April 7th general meeting was commenced with a suggestion that we move our meeting place from Mark Twain to the Rosicrucian Planetarium. The only problem is that Friday evenings are not available there. So which night would we have our meetings? Saturday?

The preliminaries concluded, Mike Ryan of the San Mateo County Astronomical Society gave a detailed talk about the 11-day Sitmar cruise last October, which included a total solar eclipse. His comments on scientific and typical cruise activities were all illustrated by many slides. (When is the next solar eclipse cruise, Mike?)

For refreshments, Cathy Pinheiro brought out a birthday cake for Penny Pinschmidt, which was enjoyed by all. Happy birthday 4 days late, Penny.

> Suzanne Lowd  
> Staff Reporter

=== PAGE 9 ===
# Editorial

Every now and then I get to feeling sorry for myself in regards to the Bulletin. I feel that many people do not realize the time and work that goes into producing these nine pages everyone gets each month. True, I enjoy being editor, but there are certain things I don't enjoy. Like, when someone says they are going to write me something, and at the last minute, after I have planned on it and left space for it, they back out. Other times everything comes to a standstill while I wait for one person to give me what I need to complete the Bulletin. Then there's the problem of getting material - people do not want to write anything, or they're too busy..... They like getting a nice bulletin every month, but to help? - -No thanks.....

On top of it all, I have a publishing problem. The Bulletin gets xeroxed at Los Gatos Office Equipment. They do a good job and it's cheap. But every time I walk in that door with my finished nine pages, the machine breaks down. I either have to wait up to a day and a half or go some place else. One month I tried San Jose Blue Print. They were more expensive and the quality was poor. So, people are not always the problem.

Luckily, I have some very appreciated faithfuls: Gerry Rattley, always on time and often early, Jim Van Nuland, eager to do nearly anything, Suzanne Lowd, my trusty, one-and-only staff reporter. It's people like them, and others I didn't even mention, who really make this bulletin.

So, when your Bulletin arrives late, think of a broken-down copy machine in Los Gatos, or one or two people who didn't go through with their promises, or others who keep me waiting. This month, May, things are going to change. I will be calling people, everyone I can, to contribute to the Bulletin. I want to get as big a backlog of articles and information that I possibly can. Sometime soon, don't be surprised if you get a call from me asking for your help.

*[Signature: Penny E. Pomerantz]*