=== PAGE 1 ===
# San Jose Amateur Astronomers Bulletin

**Bob Malm, editor (941-1343)**

## DECEMBER 1974

### SJAA Officers

- President: Tom Mungall - 257-3262
- Vice-president: Brian Day - 266-8690
- Treasurer: Jerry Rattley - 732-0202
- Secretary: Norman Wild - 252-8966

**Board members:** Dave Erickson, Bob Malm, Tom Curtis, A.B. Gregory, Jim Van Nuland, Jim Vermilion

## RECENT ACTIVITIES:

On November 1 the club held its first meeting at its new home, Olinder Center. Frank Holden, a leading double star man from Lick Observatory, delivered a most interesting talk. He reviewed the nature of double stars and their orbits, and described the techniques whereby their parameters are measured. In connection with the latter, he exhibited a micrometer for measuring the position angle and separation of the members of a binary system. He concluded by stating that, in spite of his tedious work, he still enjoys double stars in an esthetic sense.

The star party of November 16 was a wash-out (more accurately, a "cloud-out"). Yours truly ignored the weather reports and set out for the viewing site, hoping that the location would be above the clouds. Unfortunately, the grounds at Coe were in the clouds which never lifted (or lowered). On the way home your editor encountered a fog-obscured VW Bus out of which protruded a head and a flashlight-wielding arm. These proved to be owned by Jim Van Nuland who was attempting to determine the thickness of the overcast. Upon closer inspection, your reporter discovered about seven hardy individuals of the Association, huddled together in an attempt to prolong life. These included Debbie Moore, Jim Vermilion and others (please forgive me if I don't know all of your names yet.) Eventually, everybody gave up, frustrated in their celestial quests.

## COMING EVENTS:

**Friday, December 6, 1974 - 7:30 P.M.** General meeting at Olinder Center. NOTE THE NEW STARTING TIME. We shall be meeting one half hour earlier from now on because Olinder Center self-destructs at 10 P.M. After a brief description of our newly leased observing site at Mt. Umanhum (sp?), at which, if we are lucky, will be erected our club's observatory, Dave Erickson will deliver a talk on astrophotography with a Wright-Schmidt telescope. Some time will be spent on the use of cold cameras. Reproduced for those of you who may have lost it, is a map showing the way to Olinder Center.

[THIS IS FIGURE: A simple hand-drawn map showing directions to Olinder Center in Willow Glen, with streets labeled including Williams, Keyes, Story Rd, Leinweber Center, and McLaughlin. Route 280 and 101 are marked.]

**Saturday December 14, 1974:** Star party at Henry Coe State Park. Remember, the club pays for the use of this observing site.

**Friday, January 3, 1975: 7:30 P.M.** A report from the planet Jupiter by way of Ames Research (NASA).

**Saturday, January 11, 1975:** The first star party at our new observatory location at Mt. Umanhum (sp?). A map to the site will be published next month.

## NEWS NOTES:

Brian Day has been appointed our new public relations man. If you have ideas for publicizing the club, contact Brian.

## TECHNICAL NOTES:

Jim Van Nuland has calculated the following data. Times of the passage of the Redspot across Jupiter's meridian: Times are in PST (P.M.):DECEMBER 1, 10:18; 4, 749; 6,928; 9,659; 11,838; 13,1017; 14,609 (come early to the star party for this); 16, 748; 18,927; 21,658; 23,836; 25,1017; 26,609; 28,748; 30,927.

Longitude of the central meridian of the sun: Dec. 1, 334:60; Dec. 11, 202:82; Dec. 21, 71:08; Dec. 31, 299:35.

## FOR SALE:

An 8" F/6 fiberglass tube, mirror mount, heavy wooden lamenated tripod with 1 1/2" shafts, pipe fittings, and setting circles. ALSO, a Pacific Instruments mount with clock drive. Inspect and make offer. May sell parts individually. Phone 867-9225. Ask for Mike Szudy.

=== PAGE 2 ===
# -2-

## The Messier Catalog (NGC sequence), courtesy Jim Van Nuland.
### (Part Three--Conclusion)

| M | NGC | RA | | Dec. | Chart | Con | Mag | Type. | Size | Description |
|---|-----|----|----|------|-------|-----|-----|-------|------|-------------|
| 21 | 6531 | 18 | 03 | -22 30 | X | Sgr | 7 | Open | 10 | Coarse |
| 24 | 6603 | 18 | 17 | -18 26 | X | Sgr | 5 | Open | 4 | Milky Way patch |
| 16 | 6611 | 18 | 17 | -13 47 | X | Ser | 6 | Open | 25 | 100 stars in nebulosity |
| 18 | 6613 | 18 | 18 | -17 08 | X | Sgr | 8 | Open | 12 | Glorious |
| 17 | 6618 | 18 | 19 | -16 11 | X | Sgr | 8 | R:/Pn | 46x37/22 | Omega/Horseshoe Neb; Cl. |
| 28 | 6626 | 18 | 23 | -24 53 | XV | Sgr | 7 | Glob | 5 | Greatly condensed |
| 69 | 6637 | 18 | 30 | -32 22 | XV | Sgr | 9 | Glob | 3 | Small; Globular |
| 25 | 6725 | 18 | 30 | -19 16 | X | Sgr | 7 | Open | 40 | Irregular |
| 22 | 6656 | 18 | 35 | -23 57 | X | Sgr | 6 | Glob | 17 | Magnificent! |
| 70 | 6681 | 18 | 42 | -32 19 | XV | Sgr | 10 | Glob | 2 | Small |
| 26 | 6694 | 18 | 44 | - 9 25 | X | Sct | 9 | Open | 9 | Not well known |
| 11 | 6705 | 18 | 50 | - 6 18 | X | Sct | 6 | Open/N | 10 | Show object of summer sky |
| 54 | 6715 | 18 | 54 | -30 30 | XV | Sgr | 8 | Glob | 2 | Small; dim and very remote |
| 57 | 6720 | 18 | 53 | +33 00 | V | Lyr | 9 | P.Neb | 1x1 | Ring Nebula |
| 56 | 6779 | 19 | 16 | +30 08 | V | Lyr | 8 | Glob | 2 | Low power ? ? ? |
| 55 | 6809 | 19 | 39 | -30 59 | XV | Sgr | 5 | Glob | 10 | Bright |
| 71 | 6838 | 19 | 53 | +18 43 | X | Sga | 9 | Glob | 6 | Sparse |
| 27 | 6853 | 19 | 58 | +22 39 | X | Vul | 8 | P.Neb | 8x4 | Dumbbell Nebula; very fine |
| 75 | 6864 | 20 | 05 | -22 00 | XI | Sgr | 8 | Glob | 2 | Most open in sky |
| 29 | 6913 | 20 | 23 | +38 26 | V | Cyg | 7 | Open | 12 | Use low power |
| 72 | 6981 | 20 | 52 | -12 38 | XI | Aqr | 10 | Glob | 2 | Small, dim |
| 73 | 6994 | 20 | 58 | -12 44 | XI | Aqr | | Open | | 4 Stars |
| 15 | 7078 | 21 | 29 | +12 04 | XI | Peg | 6 | Glob | 7 | Fine ball of stars |
| 2 | 7089 | 21 | 32 | - 0 56 | XI | Aqr | 6 | Glob | 8 | Tight globe of stars |
| 39 | 7092 | 21 | 31 | +48 20 | V | Cyg | 5 | Open | 30 | Use low power |
| 30 | 7099 | 21 | 39 | -23 18 | XV | Cap | 8 | Glob | 6 | Fairly bright; star nearby |
| 52 | 7654 | 23 | 23 | +61 28 | V | Cas | 7 | Open | 12 | Irregular |