=== PAGE 1 ===
# SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION EPHEMERIS

## DECEMBER 1984

---

### DECEMBER 8TH GENERAL MEETING
**MIKE O'BRINE PRESENTS:**
**GLOBAL POSITIONING SATELLITE SYSTEM**

**DECEMBER 1** Los Gatos Red Cross build. Indoor star party. Doors open at 8 p.m.

**DECEMBER 8** General Meeting at 8 p.m. at the University of Santa Clara. [see map] Guest speaker Mike O'Brine will talk about the Global Positioning Satellite System.

**DECEMBER 15** Board meeting, 8 p.m. at the home of Eugene and Sharon Olshefski, 15566 "E" Alta Vista Way, SJ

**DECEMBER 22** Field Expedition for Astronomical Observation at Grant Ranch Park until Dawn. Bring warm clothing.

**DECEMBER 25** MERRY CHRISTMAS

**JANUARY 5** Indoor star party at the Los Gatos Red Cross Building. Doors open at 8 p.m.

**JANUARY 12** Board Meeting at the Los Gatos Red Red Cross building. Doors open at 8 p.m.

**JANUARY 19** Field Expedition for Astronomical Observation (FEAO) at Grant Ranch County park. Dusk till Dawn.

---

### FROM THE EDITORS DESK
BY: JOHN GLEASON

Things to note this month are the observatory survey that are in progress. Of particular interest is the SJAA's proposal to the Friends of Grant Ranch and a newly formed association at Fremont Peak. For a long time active members have wanted a permanent observing location, both close in and far out of town. Perhaps these two proposals will meet everyone's needs. Members who attended the November 10 general meeting found themselves locked out of the Alumni Science Hall at the University of Santa Clara. This was due to an error with the security paperwork and has been taken care of. December's general meeting will be held at the Alumni Science Hall as usual. Note the SJAA By-Law changes that have been reproduced inside. At the January General Meeting there will be nominations for board members. Elections to be held in Feb. The SJAA board has been looking for a Program Chairman. Someone who would take on the task of finding speakers for the monthly meetings. If interested please call any of the board members listed in this Ephemeris. And, incase you haven't noticed, you have in your hands the enlarged version of the Ephemeris. But we still need contributors to fill all this new space.

---

### OBSERVATORY ASSOCIATION AT FREMONT PEAK
BY: JOHN GLEASON

Imagine yourself setting at the cassegrain focus of a 30" telescope under the dark summer sky, digitally (just the tip of your finger) the instrument slews around to M13, the great globular cluster of Hercules. You grab for your sun glasses as you jerk your head back from the dazzling display of a thousand suns blazing forth from the effle eyepiece. In the background you can here the screaming molors of the 22" telescope starting another photo-gric run.

Fremont Peak State Park has been the focal point of Northern California amateur astronomy for several decades. It has easy year round sky visibility. Bigs bay area. Each year, round 5% to 10% per nite skys, high percentage of cloud free, dark skies and has the facilities and the security of a state park system that makes for comfortable over night observing. With all of these things going for it, little wonder that various Californian clubs and astronomical associations have organized the Fremont Peak Observatory Association (F.P.O.A.).

The associations focus will center around a permanent instrument shelter housing 2 PRIMARY aperature research telescopes. The main instrument will be used for conducting public programs on selected weekends in the park, as well as providing to the members of the F.P.O.A. a facility to use these large aperture telescopes for a wide variety of astronomical projects.

The initial ground work has already begun. Nine board members have been elected and with this enthusiasm has been submited to the local and state authorities. The officers and nine member council of individuals from active bay area astronomical associations (SJAA): Prez Robert FitzgeraId (SJAA), Vice Prez Ken Schmidt (AAAA), Secretary Glen Stewart (PAAS), Executive Secretary Rick Morrison (Park Ranger, Fremont Peak), Assistant Secretary Denni Medlock (SJAA/EAS) and members of the Board of Directors: Kevin Medlock (SJAA/EAS), Frank Dibbel (SJAA), Howard Medlock and John Gleason (SJAA). Applications and FPOA By-laws along with sample coppies of available once the official applications and site utilization programs have been approved by the state of California.

As mentioned in last months Space Update, Kevin Medlock's 30" mirror is completed. Work continues on the tube, mechanics and other equitorial mounting. Kevin says work on the counterweight alone weighs out at 600 lbs. Projected target date for completion of building and telescope is early 1986, just in time for comet Halley!

=== PAGE 2 ===
# REPORT FROM M.I.R.A.
# BY: BILL DELLINGES

Thirteen years ago a half dozen or so graduate students at Case Western Reserve University foresaw a bleak future as regards astronomy. As an alternative to battling for the limited observing time available, they decided to build their own privately funded observatory--thus was born M.I.R.A. (Monterey Institute for Research in Astronomy), see the July 1981 issue of SMITHSONIAN for a detailed story.

The project has culminated with the installation of a thirty six inch telescope in a uniquely designed two-story building on Chews Ridge (el. 5000 ft; forty miles southeast of Monterey.

On October 21st I had the pleasure of attending an evening observing session there, hosted by Dr. William Kaufmann (you may recall my report regarding his Lake Tahoe "Exploring the Universe" summer programs of past years using a rare Celestron-22). The observatory site was 130 road miles and three and a half hours travel time from my home in the bay area. Several miles consisted of a winding dirt road with negotiable in my Datsun station wagon.

The building's unusual appearance is most striking. I've not seen anything quite like it in all my visits to astronomical facilities. Difficult to describe. I refer readers to the SMITHSONIAN article and to "DEEP SKY TELESCOPE" which nicely depicts the roll-off roof approach MIRA chose. The telescope is a massive f/10 Cassegrain; the primary is reported to be 1/37th wave.

Our plan of attack was simple: we would observe everything. The clear, long autumn evening and warm-up limited to ten persons time for all; also amply ample group facilitating the operation of MIRA's neat computer equipment. Dr. Kaufmann rarely depreciated. The slow or fast slewing buttons on a hand-held paddle utilizing proper RA and DEC appeared to work properly. The finder scope would be in or near the high degree field (an RA/this scope is not).

We basically observed all the popular objects minus the night and a few not so well known items thrown in. My more memorable visions...

- **NGC 7662--Planetary nebula**--And that's exactly what this footnote means: **M13--Resolved** core--filled the field with class; overwhelmingly). Not $91--"As advertised"--W. Kaufmann. Very impressive, brilliant edges galaxy; with noted dust lane. Looked much like its photographs in this instrument. Stephan's Quintet--Four of five galaxies easily detected with direct vision. **M42--The Trapezium** was glorious. Seemed as though I was viewing their secrets from only a few light years away. The trapezoid was large, members were like bright diamonds on black velvet. Fifth and sixth "trap" stars conspicuous; white bright mottled clouds with detail beyond belief. Incredible detail of luminous twisting gas clouds. M57--Very large and bright; best view of this object I've ever had. Highlight of the evening was a finally, after years frustration, seeing the elusive faint-magnitude central star. At first, I couldn't see it. All the group could. Someone suggested I use averted vision only inside the "doughut" (which to me looked big enough to drive a truck through), not just outside it worked. Using that technique, the central star popped into view everytime!

I think we all had a good time through the long cold night, thanks to Dr. Kaufmann's indefatigable enthusiasm, astrophysical comments and advice to "wear every piece of clothing you own" (there was a heatable lounge nearby--but no one wanted it available to thaw us out. (it was cold that night, especially with the "dome" rolled back). The gods bestowed upon us a beautifully dark meteor-rippled night sky, even novices were inquiring as to whether M 13 was setting brighter than usual in the western sky next time the Praesepe--indeed, they were picking up M67 with the naked eye.

I'd like to thank Dr. Nelson Irving and his staff for making the MIRA facility available and dutifully standing about all night to make sure the equipment ran properly. Thanks also to Dr. Jack Marling for donating eyepieces and a star diagonal to convert the six ton monster into a visual instrument. I scheduled again a recommended third Seminar to follow up membership inquiries. Current SJAA members advised of future Kaufmann observing sessions.

---

## EDITORS NOTE:
**I want to thank Bill Dellinges!** Thank you! The views that Bill describes are his own observations and I think that's a large telescope. Now who do I know that's building a 36" telescope?

---

# DEEP SKY NOTES - DECEMBER
# BY: STEVE GOTTLIEB

Because of the serious light pollution in the San Francisco Bay region, deep sky observing can be a problem; where the naked eye visual threshold is between mag. 4.5-5.0, I find my 13.1" does not reach the stellar magnitude obtained with my C8 in a dark site. The situation is still worse for large extended diffuse objects, galaxies and nebulae whose surface brightness and contrast invisibility against the bright background glow.

Fortunately, for the past several years amateurs had access to a remarkable device for increasing the contrast of planetary and emission nebulae. A narrow band pass nebula filter will significantly darken the sky and boost the contrast of an object emitting light due to double-ionized oxygen. High contrast views of many nebulae can be obtained by selecting the glow caused by mercury and sodium streetlights and simulating a dark sky background. Below are the notes from a recent district comparison of the unfiltered view with the filtered view of five objects recently observed in my backyard with the 13.1" at 62X. The nebula filter used was a Lumicon Ultra High Contrast [UHC] filter from Jack Marling.

1. **M27 - Vulpecula - Planetary**
   - (a) Main dumbbell shape easily visible.
   - (b) Appearance radically altered as large extent lobes extend from the main body.

2. **NGC 6857 - Cygnus - Planetary**
   - (a) Not at all difficult; barely visible with averted vision.
   - (b) Obvious with direct vision and moderately bright with averted.

3. **NGC 6888 - Cygnus - Supernova remnant**
   - (a) Not seen.
   - (b) Large body not any certainly M/V with faint "triangle of stars" and having a fan appearance.

4. **NGC 7008 - Cygnus - Planetary**
   - (a) Fairly large, smooth oval glow with a star embedded on the east side.
   - (b) Fairly bright with a slightly darker center and a brightening along the NE side of the rim.

5. **NGC 6960-6995 - Cygnus-Supernova remnant**
   - (a) Not seen.
   - (b) Eastern loop visible for 1.5 degrees Western loop easily seen north of 52 Cygni.

6. **NGC 7635 - Cassiopeia - "Bubble" nebula**
   - (a) Only suspected knowing position.
   - (b) Visible with direct vision as a faint glow surrounding a mag. 8 star.

The UHC filter is quite amazing. I am inclined by using a low power (5x the aperture in mm is best) and switching you back and forth from all sky light. Good viewing this month! Steve Gottlieb (415) 524-4678.

=== PAGE 3 ===
# COMET COMMENTS - DECEMBER
## BY: DON MACHHOLZ

Two new comets have been discovered by professional astronomers, one is visible in our scopes now. Meanwhile, Comet Austin has faded quite a bit, but two periodic comets brighten in our morning sky.

This month sees our last "Past Discovery" installment, this section has run for two full years. I am presently up-dating and enlarging the Past Discovery series and I'll begin a new series which will replace the Past Discovery section at the end of my Comet Comments stint.

## COMET SHOEMAKER (1984r):

Carolyn and Eugene Shoemaker discovered this comet on Oct. 28 not far from the Pleiades at magnitude 18. They used the 18" Schmidt instrument at Mt. Palomar. This comet is very slowly moving further from the Sun and is getting fainter. An amazing fact about this comet is that it never got closer to the Sun than 5.5 astronomical units, always staying outside of Jupiter's orbit.

## COMET SHOEMAKER (1984s):

Found two days later by the same team and instrument used above, this comet was magnitude 12 when picked up next to galaxy NGC 772 in Aries. This comet is getting closer to the Sun and is presently visible in our scopes (positions below). Don't confuse this comet with comet Shoemaker 1984r, Comet Shoemaker (1984f) will be visible to us beginning next March, shortly after this Comet Shoemaker (1984s) fades.

HALLEY'S COMET on Dec. 15: RA: 06hr 04.8m.  
Dec.: +11deg 54.7'. Distance from the Sun: 5.44 AU. Distance from the Earth: 4.48 AU.  
Mag.: 18.1 Elong: 105 deg. Morning sky.

## EPHEMERIDES

### 1984/5  
DATE R. A.(1950) Dec. Elona. Mag.

### Periodic Comet Arend-Rigaux (1984k)

| 11-26 | 08h 12.2m | -01°26' | 116° | 11.7 |
| 12-01 | 08h 21.2m | -00°45' | 119° | 11.6 |
| 12-06 | 08h 29.5m | +00°10' | 122° | 11.5 |
| 12-11 | 08h 37.0m | +01°20' | 126° | 11.4 |
| 12-16 | 08h 43.7m | +02°45' | 130° | 11.4 |
| 12-21 | 08h 49.4m | +04°22' | 134° | 11.3 |
| 12-26 | 08h 54.2m | +06°23' | 139° | 11.3 |
| 12-31 | 08h 58.0m | +08°43' | 144° | 11.3 |
| 01-05 | 09h 00.8m | +11°11' | 149° | 11.3 |

AREND-RIGAUX NOTES: This faint comet brightens slightly as it moves through northern Hydra in the morning sky. Now is the time to get out and see this one, don't be discouraged by its faintness. It should be quite easy to see.

### Periodic Comet Schaumasse (1984m)

| 11-26 | 12h 00.1m | +09°44' | 62° | 10.7 |
| 12-01 | 12h 20.0m | +08°19' | 63° | 10.7 |
| 12-06 | 12h 39.5m | +06°23' | 65° | 10.6 |
| 12-11 | 12h 58.1m | +05°29' | 63° | 10.6 |
| 12-16 | 13h 16.3m | +04°08' | 66° | 10.7 |
| 12-21 | 13h 33.8m | +02°49' | 69° | 10.8 |
| 12-26 | 13h 50.5m | +01°34' | 69° | 10.8 |
| 12-31 | 14h 06.6m | +00°24' | 70° | 10.9 |
| 01-05 | 14h 21.8m | -00°42' | 71° | 11.0 |

SCHAUMASSE NOTES: In the morning sky and quickly moving near the equator this comet holds a steady magnitude and elongation at around 65 degrees. It also remains equidistant from both the Sun and the Sun at 1.2 AU. It may be slightly fainter than these predictions suggest.

## Comet Shoemaker (1984s)

| 11-26 | 02h 10.4m | +03°13' | 147° | 10.4 |
| 12-01 | 02h 16.8m | +00°08' | 142° | 10.2 |
| 12-06 | 02h 24.3m | -03°12' | 137° | 10.1 |
| 12-11 | 02h 35.0m | -06°19' | 132° | 9.9 |
| 12-16 | 02h 47.1m | -09°15' | 128° | 9.8 |
| 12-21 | 03h 01.1m | -11°54' | 125° | 9.8 |
| 12-26 | 03h 17.0m | -14°13' | 122° | 9.7 |
| 12-31 | 03h 34.5m | -16°08' | 120° | 9.7 |
| 01-05 | 03h 53.4m | -17°37' | 119° | 9.8 |

Shoemaker notes: Our original comet this month is well-placed, above the horizon nearly all night, and it will be only 0.57 AU from the Earth in mid-Dec. The magnitudes predicted are based on only two weeks of observations, so they may be off a bit.

## PAST DISCOVERIES

Are some constellations more "popular" than others when it comes to finding comets in them? Are certain parts of the celestial sphere favored over others? A look at the 28 comets discovered by amateurs only between 1975 and 1983 shows some parts of the sky favored over others.

As for the Right Ascension of the comets at discovery we find this:

- 00h to 06h Right Ascension: 5 discoveries.
- 06h to 12h Right Ascension: 10 discoveries.
- 12h to 18h Right Ascension: 5 discoveries.
- 18h to 24h Right Ascension: 8 discoveries.

And as for the declinations of the discovery positions
19 were found North of the equator, all found by observers in the Northern Hemisphere. The one northerly was found at 68deg. 15', were found South of the equator, all but 4 found by observers in the Southern Hemisphere.

And when the discovery positions were compared with the ecliptic:
12 were found North of the ecliptic, 16 were found South of the ecliptic. Certainly more were found South of the ecliptic, two of these turned out to be periodic comets of low inclination.

18 constellations had one discovery each. The following constellations contained two discoveries: Pegasus, Orion, Draco, Ursa Major, Scorpius and Draco. And the discovery positions closest to each other are William Bradfield finds. Comets 1978l and 1980t. Their positions were 1.2 deg. apart, one being found 51 weeks after the other, in Southern Scorpius.

=== PAGE 4 ===
# GRANT RANCH OBSERVING SITE PROPOSAL
## BY DAVE AMBROSE

### INTRODUCTION

When developing a proposal, it is helpful to agree on a set of objectives and ground rules for achieving them. Below I have outlined what I think we ought to achieve with a Grant Ranch observing site, and the contractual conditions we will need. In doing this, it is my desire to prevent straying afield from our primary objectives.

### OBJECTIVES:

1. Provide a site for close-in star parties.

2. Provide a permanently mounted telescope for use in ongoing observing programs.

3. Provide a facility for public education programs.

4. Provide a visible facility for the SJAA to help attract new members and serve as a publicity vehicle.

### PHASE I

From the SJAA's perspective, this phase is primarily concerned with developing access to the site. There would be little in the way of specialized facilities but the developments would be designed with astronomy in mind. From the county's view, there would be little increase in the accommodating astronomical uses.

The initial step would be to get a reasonable road, power, and water to the site. After that, the site could be developed as a picnic area. Trailhead and vista point, developing the site for public uses would expand the restrictions of a parking lot, rest rooms and picnic area. Fortunately, none of these would not interfere with astronomy uses. Spacing additions by the SJAA would be limited to the construction of concrete pads or piers for telescopes.

Activities at the Grant Ranch site could occur after development begins. Once the road is put in, the site would become usable for star parties. After the parking lot and rest rooms are constructed, public star parties would be practical. The SJAA would maintain its current star party schedule. In addition, our well publicized events would still be scheduled for prime locations so that with the SJAA our normal star parties would be run as part sponsored events to which the public is always welcome. The lectures that the SJAA sponsors could also be held at the Grant Ranch park, providing that suitable facilities were available. These lectures could be planned around the other scheduled activities at the observatory site itself. An additional activity that should be explored more fully are special lectures and demonstrations which would be held for specific public and private schools science classes.

We should not lose sight of the benefits to be gained from astronomical activities are available at the completion of phase 1.

### PHASE II

Phase 2 would encompass the construction of a small permanent building on the site. This would most likely be a roll-off roof observatory with some provision for storage and rudimentary facilities for public lectures.

These facilities would serve as enhancements to our existing programs, a roof-off roof would allow a large telescope to be installed on the site for use as a public viewing instrument and for members observing programs.

There are other projects that could be part of phase two. One easy project would be to put a sundial and explanation on the south wall of the observatory or other building. An analemma sphere could also be installed at the site by interested members.

A third project under serious discussion is a scale model of the solar system. The model would be about 1 mile long and consist of appropriately sized spheres placed at their correct distances from the sun. This model was suggested by Michael Portuesi and a model of the solar system is a way that most people will understand. This project fits well with the proposed trailhead at the site.

---

# THE CELESTIAL TOURIST SPEAKS
## BY JAY REYNOLDS FREEMAN

Recent interesting observations prompt resurrection of this longdormant column.

Several years ago, I first saw Stefan's Quintet in a 16-inch telescope, and I was impressed. So when I got my C-14 and found the Quintet therein, I thought I was doing well. But Jack Zeiders showed it to me in his 10-inch Newtonian. It required averted vision, yet it was there. And later I thought I think -- also with averted vision -- in Mary Engle's.

At Fremont Peak on September 29, I was looking for the Quintet with a Super-Polaris and a 35 Panoptic -- quite recall its location with respect to NGC 7331; the Quintet lies about 0.5 degrees southwest of that star. I used a larger telescope to refresh my memory. Once I knew where it was, it was easy in the C-8 at 100X. Encouraged and feeling crazy, I said "Oh yes" and cranked up a 6-inch f/8 Plössl. Bob Stefan's Quintet in a six-inch f/8 Newtonian at 48X. It helped that Bob's mirrors had been realiminized a month before.

How about something smaller? Somebody had a C-5. And at 50X the Quintet was not merely glimpseable. I knew exactly where it was and use averted vision, of course, but there was no doubt. This observation was confirmed by both Kevin Medlock and Bob Schaak.

We couldn't find a four-inch, and Kevin couldn't provide the Quintet in his crown/fluorite 700-mm refractor. In infrared and crazier mood, I looked with his binocular and actually suspected something was there, but could not really claim to see it. The binocular's two objectives scoop in almost as much light as the C-5, so possibly the problem was inadequate magnification and not insufficient photons.

The key to these observations was precise position! I had carefully located the Quintet with respect to NGC 7331 and to several stars bright enough to show up in the telescope. Sometimes in a little scope, locating is as useful as it often is with galaxies. The successful observations were made with 2 mm or 3 mm exit pupils. We were not using rich-field powers.

What fun! Stefan's Quintet in a five-inch telescope! Bob, Kevin and I were chortling like loons. And what a shame that most observers realize so little of the potential of their equipment.

=== PAGE 5 ===
# By-Laws Revisions

A number of changes to the By-Laws of SJMA have been proposed. To save space, only the changed sections will be given here. The full text of the proposed By-Laws may be obtained from Jim Van Nuland. These changes will be explained and discussed at the December meeting, and each change will be voted upon at the January meeting. Call Jim if you have questions.

**Article II, section I, part c. Strike: ... the right to vote and to receive.... Insert ... receiving....**

This will give Honorary Members a vote at Membership Meetings. It seems miserly to withhold the right to vote from someone we wish to honor. Change proposed by Jim Van Nuland.

**III-2. Change ... June ... to ... February.... Strike the last sentence (beginning: Twenty-five percent ...).**

The intent is to to move the election of the Board of Directors to February. Our attendance is usually rather small in June; it is felt that February will permit more people to attend and vote at the election. Suggested by various people; formally proposed by Steve Greenberg and the Board.

**III-5. Strike the words: ... other than the Annual Meeting....**

This change, along with the second part of the above, eliminates minimum attendance for the election. Change proposed by Jim Van Nuland, Bob Fingerhut, and the Board.

**III-6. Proxy Vote. If a Member is unable to attend a regular or special meeting of the membership, the Member may vote in absentia by one of the following methods.**

1. The absent Member may designate another voting Member to vote in their place. The absent Member shall inform the presiding officer of the proxy before the meeting is called to order.

2. The absent Member may designate their vote on a specific issue prior to the meeting. The absent Member shall deliver the vote and the issue to be proxied to the presiding officer before the meeting is called to order.

In all cases, the absent Member shall be recorded as having cast their vote. The Secretary shall record in the minutes of the meeting that the vote was delivered by proxy and the person acting as proxy.

This proposed new section parallels the provision for absentee vote by Board Members. Proposed by Jim Van Nuland following Dave Ambrose's text.

**IV-8. Roll-Call Voting. Any vote of the Board may be polled by roll call at the discretion of the presiding officer, or on a motion (with second) by any Director.**

**IV-9. Proxy Vote. If a Director is unable to attend a regular or special board meeting, the Director may vote in absentia by one of the following methods.**

1. The absent Director may designate another voting Director to vote in their place. The absent Director shall inform the presiding officer of the proxy before the meeting is called to order.

2. The absent Director may designate their vote on a specific issue prior to the meeting. The absent Director shall deliver the vote and the issue to be proxied to the presiding officer before the meeting is called to order.

3. During a meeting, an absent Director may be contacted by telephone, telegram, or other appropriate medium of communication to cast a vote.

In all cases, the absent Director shall be recorded as having cast their vote. The Secretary shall record in the minutes of the meeting that the vote was delivered by proxy and the person acting as proxy.

A proxy vote will count as though the absent Director was present. For the purposes of attendance requirements, the absent Director will be considered excused.

The above two new provisions are needed in certain cases of legally-important votes, especially involving finances. Proposed by Dave Ambrose and the Board.

**VIII-2. Notice of any such repeal, amendment, or adoption shall be submitted to all Active Members 30 days prior to a Special Meeting being called for that purpose. When action is to be taken at a regular Membership Meeting, notice shall be given, and the topic discussed, at the regular Meeting prior to the one at which action is to be taken.**

This rewording does not make a practical change, but it does clarity the course to be followed in making revisions to the By-Laws. Proposed by Jim Van Nuland and the Board.

Respectfully Submitted,
**James M. Van Nuland,
Secretary, SJMA.**

[THIS IS FIGURE: A decorative illustration showing what appears to be a landscape scene with stars or decorative elements]

=== PAGE 6 ===
# GENERAL MEETINGS:

University of Santa Clara, Alumni Science Hall, room 102. Heading north on Hwy 17, exit at Bascom/Washington Ave (north), proceed to Franklin, then turn right. Heading south on Hwy 17, exit at the Alameda (north), proceed to Franklin, then turn left. Go two blocks past Bascom to Washington. Alumni Science Hall is the 3 story building that borders the east end of the parking lot. Room 102 is on the ground floor and is best gotten to by entering the first door on the south side of the building when walking in from the parking lot. MEETINGS BEGIN AT 8 PM.

[MAP DIAGRAM showing directions with labeled roads: THE ALAMEDA, ALVISO, ANNUASEDA, FRANKLIN, and BASCOM]

## INDOOR STAR PARTIES:

Los Gatos Red Cross Building, 18011 Los Gatos-Saratoga Rd, Los Gatos. From Hwy 17 south take the Hwy 9 (Saratoga) exit and continue on Los Gatos Saratoga road for about 1.5 miles. Turn right at Rose Ave. and turn right immediately into the parking lot of the Red Cross Building. OPEN AT 8 PM.

[MAP DIAGRAM showing directions with HWY 17 and roads]

## GRANT RANCH COUNTY PARK:

This site is a new one for the SJAA, so come and try it out. Located on Mt. Hamilton Road halfway between San Jose and Lick Observatory, it is easy to get to from the Bay Area. Take Hwy 101 (either direction) to Alum Rock Rd. Go east up Alum Rock Road to Mt. Hamilton Road and follow it. Grant ranch is just past the Quimby road intersection. After sunset, the park front gate will be locked with the SJAA combination lock. Use the sequence OL-H-CL-H-OP. (This is the sequence of the lock behind you, coming or going. There are two gates; the lock may be on the exit gate, if so enter the park from this gate.

[MAP DIAGRAM showing MT. HAMILTON RD, QUIMBY RD, and HWY 680]

# FREMONT PEAK STATE PARK:

Take Hwy 101 south towards Salinas. Take Hwy 156 east (San Juan Bautista) for two miles to a yellow flashing light. Turn right and go about .25 miles to another road (groves slightly to left), go straight up this road for about 10 miles until the road splits. DO NOT follow road to the left about 11 miles to unto the park. SJAA sets up at Coulter Camp overflow area. It's visible as you drive up into main area of camp. Parking lights only after dark.

[MAP DIAGRAM showing Fremont Peak area with roads]

# ASTRO ADS

Celestron 80 refractor with equatorial mount and motor drive. Like new. $375 (firm). Celestron 12" f/6 mirror cell. Used but in excellent condition. $275 (firm). Lots of surplus astro stuff. Aerial lenses, finders, odds and ends, $200 or best offer. Call: Eva Butler, 408-225-0779 (Sara Jose).

Make Offer: All parts for 6" reflector. Includes mirror kit (trough grindings begun), Edmund driven mount. All components for tube assembly, Camera mount, 2 eyepieces. Price is open. Contact: Mark Yamonaka, 408-2482294 (home), or 408-429-8062 (UCSC).

For Sale: 300mm f/5.6 Celestron Mirror/Lens telephoto, Nikon TMount. Nikon F camera body. New lens, camera recently overhauled by EPDI of San Francisco. Equipment like new. $375. Contact Steve Greenberg, 415-443-6638 eves or 415-422-1606 days.

For Sale: Trekker Scope model 6-S for $200 Contact Andy Jaros 408-3775-1321

For Sale: 78" Celestron C-8 w/coatings, wedge, tripod and many acessories. Excellent condition $350.00 Contact Duncan Pairman.

EPHEMERIS is published monthly by the San Jose Astronomical Association, 3905 Calico Ave., San Jose, Cas. 95124

# OFFICERS:

**PRESIDENT**: Dave Ambrose 816 Everett St., El Cerrito, CA. 94530 (415) 524-0869

**Vice-Pres**: Dennis Medlock, 15022 Broadway Terrace, Oakland, CA. 95124 (415) 644-8558

**Sec.**: James Van Nuland, 3509 Calico Ave., San Jose, CA. 95124 (408) 371-1307

**Treas.**: Robert Fingerhut, 340 Rio Verde Place, #4, Milpitas, CA. 95035 (408) 263-4455

## BOARD OF DIRECTORS:

Paul Mancuso (408) 946-0738, Steve Greenberg (415) 443-6638, Tom Ahl (408) 997-1383, Gene Cisneros (408) 923-6800, Joe Sunseri, Chris Pratt (408) 629-2994

**EPHEMERIS EDITOR**: John Gleason 5361 Port Sailwood Dr., Newark, CA. 94560

=== PAGE 7 ===
# THE SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION

Deep-sky observing, Astrophotography, Telescope making, Eclipses, Computerized astronomy. Whatever your astronomical interests, you'll find people in the San Jose Astronomical Association who will enjoy sharing their knowledge with you.

## ACTIVITIES

The SJAA sponsors an activity every Saturday night except around certain holidays:

**General Meetings**, featuring programs on various astronomical topics, are held once a month a the Alumni Science Building at the University of Santa Clara.

**Star Parties**-group observing sessions, are held at several different locations, some close to the city, and others far from it, some in the adjacent mountains.

**Indoor "Star Parties"** provide an informal opportunity to show slides, work on equipment, exchange ideas, etc. They are held in the Los Gatos Red Cross building.

## MEMBERSHIP BENEFITS

You need not be a member of the San Jose Astronomical Association to participate in our activities, but membership does grant certain advantages:

**Twelve** months of **Sky and Telescope** magazine, and reduced rates on products from Sky Publishing Corporation.

**SJAA Ephemeris**, a monthly newsletter, containing a calendar of events and news of other interesting activities.

**Use of club telescopes.** [Both reflectors and refractors are available.] Access to the SJAA's library of books, magazines, and pamphlets.

The San Jose Astronomical Association, founded in 1954, is a non-profit group devoted to expanding the general public's interest in astronomy, conducting research within the capabilities of amateurs, and promoting the science of astronomy.

[THIS IS FIGURE: Simple line drawings of 8 different types of telescopes arranged in a row, numbered 1-8]

---

## SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION

MEMBERSHIP ONLY: $8.00    MEMBERSHIP/S&T: $21.00    JUNIOR (UNDER 12): $15.00

Name ____________________________________________

Address __________________________________________

__________________________________________

Telephone (_____)_________________________________

Please bring this form to any SJAA meeting, or send to:
Robert Fingerhut, Treas.
San Jose Astronomical Association
340 Rio Verde Pl. #4, Milpitas, CA 95035

[Phone: (408) 263-4455]

Membership: Adult ___ Junior (under 18) ___
*Bulletin* Subscription only: ___

### Questionnaire (optional)

What are your astronomical interests (e.g. astrophotography, deep-sky observation, telescope making, etc.)? ___________________________________________

___________________________________________

___________________________________________

___________________________________________

Do you own a telescope? _________ If so, what kind?

___________________________________________

Is there any specific area of astronomy that you feel qualified to help others with? _____________________

___________________________________________

=== PAGE 8 ===
# SPACE PROGRAM UPDATE BY: BOB FINGERHUT

[Small satellite icon illustration]

## DISCOVERY RETRIEVES TWO SATELLITES

The shuttle received two communication satellites on Nov. 12 and 14th whose boosters malfunctioned earlier this year. Two other communications satellites were also launched.

## NEXT SHUTTLE FLIGHT DELAYED

The next launch which was scheduled for Dec. 8 has been delayed until the 18th of Dec. The delay has been caused by a material called Screed which is used to smooth the aluminum surface of the orbiter under the tiles. The Screed has a tendency to chip off due to the water-proofing agent not being compatible with the screed. The tiles will have to be removed to about 200 tiles and then replaced. Mission 61-C is now scheduled for Jan 22 and 51-E in February. When 51-C is launched, the payload will be a classified geosynchronous orbit satellite. The Inertial Upper Stage booster will be used. Satellite's Commander Hoot Gibson, Pilot Charles F. Bolden, will fly for the first time. He has been training in secret for this flight and is one of 25 defense manned space flight engineer-astronauts. The time of launch will not be made public until the countdown reaches T minus 9, but will be made narrower to smaller time about 1 minute period prior to launch. The other crewmen will be Mission Commander Thomas K. Mattingly, Mission Pilot, Loren J. Shriver, Ellison S. Onizuka and James F. Buchli.

## GOES-10 WEATHER SATELLITE REACTIVATED

The satellite was reactivated by NOAA following a successful maneuver to free a stuck bearing in its imaging system. GOES-I's continued operation depends on the performance of an encoder lamp that has a history of low output but now is operating properly.

## RESCUE SATELLITES TO OPERATE THROUGH AT LEAST 1990

International participants in the Sarsat/Cospas satellite-aided search and rescue system have agreed to extend the program through 1990. Both the U.S. and Soviet Union will maintain two satellites in orbit with Sarsat/Cospas repeaters. Distress beacons will be 121.5 MHz and 406 MHz.

## SOVIETS TARGET TWO VENUS LANDERS

The Soviets will launch two Vega Venus/Halley's Comet spacecraft this December. The two spacecraft will fly by Venus in 1985 and the lander probes which will put down about 300-600 miles apart will also release the atmospheric balloons 33-35 miles above the Venusian surface. The main spacecraft will continue on to encounter Halley's Comet in early 1986.

## TDRS LAUNCHED TO RESUME SERVICE

The second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B) has resumed its rollout of storage for delivery to NASA. It is believed that problems with the inertial upper stage (IUS), which put TDRS-A into the wrong orbit, have been solved.

## SPACE TELESCOPE TUBE ASSEMBLY DELIVERED TO LOCKHEED

The optical tube assembly was flown into Moffett Field on Nov. 4 and taken to a Support/Ground airplane. It was delivered to Lockheed for integration with the spacecraft a few days later.

## NOAA-F TO STUDY THE ATMOSPHERE

The NOAA-F satellite was scheduled for launch from Vandenberg on an Atlas booster the second week in December 1985. It will study whether pollutants are radically changing the Earth's atmospheres. It will also provide weather photographs and successive relay beacon for the joint U.S.-Soviet-French-Canadian search and rescue system.

---

SJAA EPHEMERIS  
3509 CALICO AVE  
SAN JOSE,CA 95124

BULK RATE  
U.S. POSTAGE PAID  
PERMIT NO. 5381  
SAN JOSE, CA. 95125

---

TIME VALUE-DATED  
NEWS MATERIAL