=== PAGE 1 ===
# SAN JOSE
# ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION ═══════ SJAA ═══════
# *EPHEMERIS*

═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
## *NOVEMBER 1984*
═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

## *EVENTS CALENDAR*

**NOVEMBER 3** Los Gatos Indoor Star Party. Open at 8 p.m.

**NOVEMBER 10** General Meeting at 8 p.m. at the University of Santa Clara Alumni Science hall. Nick Vaivodica, Project Mgr. for Voyager at Ball Aerospace probe will be this evenings featured speaker. This should be an extremely informative lecture, since Galileo is one of his projects. The probe that the United States will be launching this century. Bring a friend.

**NOVEMBER 17** Board Meeting at 8 p.m. at the Los Gatos Red Cross. Come and argue with the best of them.

**NOVEMBER 24** Another Fremont Peak "Freeze Party". Dust till Dawn. Bring your power pants.

**DECEMBER 1** Los Gatos Indoor Star Party. Open at 8 p.m.

**DECEMBER 8** General Meeting at 8 p.m. at the University of Santa Clara Alumni Science hall. Program to be announced.

## *COMET COMMENTS*

BY DON MACHHOLZ

During the past month we've heard of the discovery of three comets and the recovery of two more. In the past we have seen a large number of comets found in one month, and this seems to hold true this year too. One of the five comets should be visible in our scopes.

### PERIODIC COMET SCHAUMASSE (1984m):

This comet was first discovered in 1911. it has a period of 8.2 years but has not been seen in years. Carolyn and Eugene of Palomar recovered it on Sep. 5 at mag 18 in southern Gemini. It may be visible in amateurs' scopes and positions are included below.

### PERIODIC COMET KOWAL-MRKOS (1984n):

Charles Kowal of Palomar discovered this comet on April 23 of this year. It was also photographed by Antonin Mrkos. at mag. 16. It was assumed to be a minor planet, but observations now show it to be a comet with a 7.2 year period. It is not expected to get any brighter.

### COMET MEIER (1984o):

Rolf Meier of Ottawa discovered this, his fourth comet, on Sept. 17 at mag. 11.7. It was in the evening sky about 10 degrees north of M5. It was closest the Sun (0.86AU) on Oct. 13 and is not expected to get much brighter.

### PERIODIC COMET TSUCHINSHAN (1984p):

P. Seki of Japan recovered this comet on Sept. 4, when it was just north of Orion in the morning sky. It has an orbital period of 6.7 years and will remain faint.

### COMET SHOEMAKER (1984q):

Carolyn and Eugene Shoemaker of Palomar found the 13 mag. comet the Square of Pegasus on Sept. 27. It was closest the Sun in late June and will be getting fainter.

## EPHEMERIDES

**DATE** R. A. (1950) Dec. Elong. Mag.

### Comet Austin (1984i)

| DATE | R.A. | Dec. | Elong. | Mag. |
|------|------|------|--------|------|
| 10-27 | 03h 24.9m | +47°28' | 141° | 9.5 |
| 11-01 | 02h 37.2m | +43°56' | 150° | 9.8 |
| 11-06 | 02h 00.3m | +39°50' | 154° | 10.2 |
| 11-11 | 01h 32.9m | +35°44' | 153° | 10.5 |
| 11-16 | 01h 12.9m | +31°59' | 148° | 10.9 |
| 11-21 | 00h 58.5m | +28°44' | 141° | 11.3 |
| 11-26 | 00h 48.1m | +25°59' | 135° | 11.7 |
| 12-01 | 00h 40.7m | +23°43' | 128° | 12.0 |
| 12-06 | 00h 35.5m | +21°50' | 122° | 12.4 |

This fine comet is above the horizon nearly all night long as it pulls away from the Sun. But along with this comes a decrease in size as moves rapidly against the stars. Get out and see this one as it fades into the night sky.

### Periodic Comet Schaumasse (1984m)

| DATE | R.A. | Dec. | Elong. | Mag. |
|------|------|------|--------|------|
| 10-27 | 09h 55.2m | +17°06' | 62° | 11.4 |
| 11-01 | 10h 15.2m | +16°05' | 68° | 11.2 |
| 11-06 | 10h 37.2m | +14°59' | 68° | 11.1 |
| 11-11 | 10h 58.3m | +13°46' | 68° | 11.0 |
| 11-16 | 11h 19.2m | +12°29' | 68° | 10.8 |
| 11-21 | 11h 39.8m | +11°07' | 68° | 10.8 |
| 11-26 | 12h 00.1m | +09°44' | 69° | 10.7 |
| 12-01 | 12h 20.0m | +08°19' | 69° | 10.7 |
| 12-06 | 12h 39.4m | +06°53' | 68° | 10.6 |

This small periodic comet brightens in the morning sky. It is faint but try to get that large telescope out to track this one down.

### Periodic Comet Arend-Rigaux (1984k)

| DATE | R.A. | Dec. | Elong. | Mag. |
|------|------|------|--------|------|
| 10-27 | 07h 07.3m | -02°11' | 103° | 12.4 |
| 11-06 | 07h 30.6m | -02°25' | 107° | 12.1 |
| 11-16 | 07h 52.4m | -02°14' | 111° | 11.9 |
| 11-26 | 08h 12.2m | -01°26' | 115° | 11.7 |
| 12-06 | 08h 29.5m | +00°10' | 122° | 11.5 |

This is the recovered comet we discussed above. It will be closest the Sun in early Dec. (at 2.2AU) and nearly an equal distance from the Earth. It will be at its greatest elongation from the Sun in the morning sky.

=== PAGE 2 ===
# DEEP SKY NOTES

**BY: STEVE GOTTLIEB**

If you are considering making a move up from 6" to 8"(or 10") aperture take note of my experiences in directly comparing a Celestron 8(C8) and a 13.1" Odyssey I on globulars and galaxies during the last two years.

**GLOBULARS**: An 8" will highly resolve about a dozen well placed globular providing very satisfying viewing. These include M2, M3, M5, M22, M4, M92, M30, M10, M12, M55 and M15 in that order. In a dark sky, from several dozen to several hundred stars can be observed in these clusters. In addition, a second group of 15-20 (including M53, M28, M69, M70, M56, M71, M80 and M107) show resolution but the cores remain generally hazy in appearance. The remaining clusters (over 50 others within reach of an 8") are unresolved.

In a 13", the brighter globulars are spectacular and resolved down to their cores. In the standard 8.7 group, I now count several hundred to a thousand faint stars scattered across their disks.

**GALAXIES**: An 8" will reveal hundreds of galaxies in a dark sky with careful searching. The Virgo and Fornax galaxy clusters are available for quite fruitful searches. Though mag. 13" and fainter galaxies down to roughly mag. 12" to mag. 13.5" appear as undistinguished faint blurs with their main characteristics being size, shape and orientation. Slightly brighter ones may reveal more intense cores or stellar nuclei. Unfortunately, details in galaxy structure are generally beyond the 8" aperture, although notable exceptions are M31, dust and mottling in NGC 253, dust in M82 and 64 and large emission nebulosity. NGC 604 in the outer part of one of the spiral arms in M33.

A 13" class will reveal a few thousand galaxies. If you have the time and patience a number (I've been making a "complete" catalogue including the Coma, Berenices, Perseus and Hercules galaxy clusters. Lastly, scopes over 12" will now reveal some interesting galaxy structure. The spiral arms appear in M66, M51, M81, M99, M100, M64, in M83, M95, M33, M101, M96, M88, M98 and other NGC objects which can be glimpsed in NGC 4565, 3628, 891 and of course, M104. Huge emission nebulae are visible in the arms of M33, M101, NGC 2403 and NGC 4631.

**CONCLUSION**: As the brightness steps in many globulars appear around Mag 13, these objects can really be appreciated in scopes from 8" and up. Since a 13" will reach one magnitude deeper, the views will be more stunning. For galaxies, an 8" will probably provide enough aperture for a lifetime of objects to search for, such as basic galaxy structure, such as spiral arms and dust lanes! 12" to 18" aperture is necessary.

GOOD VIEWING THIS MONTH!

STEVE GOTTLIEB (415) 524-4678

**EDITOR NOTE:**

Equating magnification and photographic type sky transparancy and the deep sky observers experience are the factors that influence what we can see through a telescope. To understand the effect that a telescope has on the surface brightness of extended objects like galaxies and nebula I highly recommend reading page 41 of the July 1976 issue of S+T. It is called: Visual Image Brightness. It can be found on page 47 of the September 1979 issue of Astronomy magazine. Mr. Plante states that under the right conditions, an amatures present telescope can produce an image as bright as the 200-inch telescope on Mount Palomar.

**HALLEY'S COMET IN NOVEMBER:**

11/14: RA:06hr 31.8m. Dec: +12deg.04.3'. Distance from the Sun: 5.71 AU. Distance from the Earth: 5.0 AU. Magnitude: 18.6.

## DAYLIGHT OBSERVATIONS OF DOUBLE STARS BY: DR. A. B. GREGORY

Splitting double stars in daylight? Why in daylight? Isn't it hard enough to split close doubles on clear, dark nights? The answer may be surprising: it is easier, once the star is found, because of the absence of glare, of diffraction rings and because of lesser contrast. Obviously, I am speaking of doubles 1-3 or more between sunset and little sunrise. But the separation of two bright companions is not only easier by daylight, but also sharper, more definite.

A case point is Castor, Alpha Geminorum, with components of 1.98 and 2.89 magnitudes respectively, with a separation of about 1.9 seconds of arc. At night this binary's components appear as sharply defined, dull disks, of greenish-yellow color, with ample sky between them, like twins floating in the sky. That was done with a 7 or 8mm eyepiece, giving a magnification of 285 and 250X for the Celestron, but at much lower power--at 100X, clearly mark out that they are, in fact, double.

But, in my experience in the observing and splitting of doubles was not confined to binaries with components of the same magnitudes. One good example is 2°Zet Epsilon Bootis, where the primary is at 2.7 and the companion at 4.8 magnitude, with separation of 2.9 seconds of arc, at night a very tricky double. In fact, it was because of fear that I became interested in daylight doubles! Now I can resolve it very easily. About a 50 p.m. and on through to twilight I have pointed my telescope at Izar after having used a 15-18mm magnifying (100-145x) finder. Bootis. A young astronomer friend who had suggested our looking at stars in the daylight, knowing that my speciality was double stars, with setting circles I -could-time point upon seeing Izar. "But that is a double!" It was not even at high magnification.

## LOW MAGNITUDE SPLITTING

And daylight splitting can go down further in magnitudes, On March 24th, 1982, I took a look at the bright primary star in Orionis, easily, although it is on mag. 7.0 (separation 9.2" arc. Primary 0.34 mag.) That was at 5:40 on a day when sunset was at 6:30 on the same day, just a few minutes later. I was able to see the companion of Procyon, Alpha Canis Minoris--a which is of mag. 13 at separation of 4°.3 sec. As I did not want to trust my own observation, I had a friend verify the position angle. For these observations I used a 5-inch aperture at f.12 down, described further down. The most difficult split was, of course, that of the companion to a 13th magnitude star at 8.7 and a separation of 7.6". [1950] I used an 8mm eyepiece with a Polaroid filter in addition to the stop-down diaphragm. Here again a had my friend verify the position angle. However, I doubt that many amateurs would do this! I believe they should have no hesitation in splitting this binary system of 2.61 and 3.80 magnitudes. By experimentation you should find out how far down you could go in magnitude.

The trick in this procedure is, of course, finding the star in the daylight! The stars ridding well above the horizon challenge with resulting great satisfaction when successful. And 10 is as much of an attraction, as much proof of your skill as the actual separation of difficult doubles. It is a severe test of your observing skill and your ability to precisely orientate and aligning your setting circels. In fact, like the use of rotting circels and sidereal time.

=== PAGE 3 ===
# KNOW YOUR SIDEREAL TIME

Thorough knowledge of sidereal time is essential. You must be able to ascertain, before beginning to look for stars, which ones would be visible from the viewpoint of your location with a specific time. Charts of sidereal time are specific for a given P.M. local mean time, are readily available. If, for instance, you know that sidereal time is 9:40 for April 18 at 8 p.m. local mean time, you know that, at 5 p.m. sidereal time is 8h. 39.5 min. You can get any cheap clock and set it for sidereal time for any specific moment. Remember that the change of sidereal time would be very small, indeed. One word of caution: in computing your sidereal time, if you are west of the time meridian of your time zone, you must subtract the difference between local mean time and your own local (true) time, and add the difference if you are east of the meridian. For instance, Los Angeles, Calif. my location west of the meridian then is a time difference of 7 minutes, to be subtracted from the sidereal time of the chart. Therefore, in the example above, at 5 p.m. April 18, the sidereal time would be 8h. 32.5 min., a start with the right ascension of object desired would appear due south at 8.55. In the same example Regulus, Alpha Leonis, declination +12 degrees, R.A. 10h07' would be well situated. 3h. 34.5 min. or about 52 degrees east of the zenith. It should be a great satisfaction to all amateur astronomers to know that approximately of objects in the sky that are bright visible, their own sidereal watch is an ordinary wrist watch converted to sidereal speed by a local watchmaker and former astronomy student of mine. The price for such a watch would be about $30.00. There is a curious fact about this year, 1972 concerning sidereal time. It is this: sidereal time is 1h. ahead of L.M.T. so that there is a time error of about 4 minutes (3.56). On March 1 sidereal time is 4 minutes behind of what the charts say. You can compensate for that in the calculation of the time differential between your local time and mean time of your time zone.

---

# POINTING YOUR CELESTRON

How to translate sidereal time into the position of your Celestron: The right ascension circle was a pointer added by me with the telescope and which of a bright star must be the same setting of that star that you have in your field. That does not work in daylight. You need a second pointer to give you sidereal time for the moment, a pointer which will give you the overhead position of the equatorial declination to swing around in right ascension until the aperture end of the tube is precisely level, measured across the center from the tines of the fork mounts. Opposite the movable pointer (or vernier pointer) you put another marker on the base of the clock drive. That new pointer or marker will hereafter be the sidereal time pointer. Set your sidereal time. The gap between the two pointers is the hour angle of the star. In the example of Regulus, you turn your right ascension circle until the new marker points to 0.6 32.5. Then swing the movable pointer to 10 07., the R. A. of Regulus, and you find that this marker is on the zero setting. That your telescope is properly aligned to true north and that your mount is level in order to align your telescope is not within the scope of this discussion. However, in my opinion, the best way to ascertain latitude and longitude of your location is to call the correct sidereal time in your local time coordinate of a public building nearest to you, a school, a shopping center or a church. You need the longitude for figuring the correct sidereal time for your location. The time difference is not difficult to compute on the basis of 1 hour = 15 degrees.

---

To find stars in the daytime, it may be necessary to stop down the aperture of your instrument by placing a diaphragm in front of the aperture (perhaps as a sample lid) about 3 inches diameter, to darken the sky and sharpen definition, just as for night viewing. It should be standard procedure to start with a long focal length eyepiece with widest field, like an Erfle, in order to have the largest net position to catch the stellar image. Once the image is caught, try higher magnifications, you should center the star in your field at is very easy to lose it by focusing in daylight for shorter focal length eyepieces. Parfocal eyepieces would come in handy here. The last refocusing necessary, the better. It will also be a good idea to use the moon as a trial object on your star diaphragm or in conjunction with it, in order to darken the sky.

A word of caution as to focus: it is extremely difficult to focus in daylight because the out of focus blur (fuzziness) is not visible. Therefore, the focus should be carefully adjusted with a bull's eye on your star by an observation the night or day before. If your finderscope is too small to show deep sky objects at night, it is also too small to show even bright stars in daylight. You must achieve a bull's eye.

Finally, with your star in daylight, upoh fine tuning of R.A. you will experience upon splitting of your first double in daylight, will be well worth all your efforts and preparations.

## EDITORS NOTE:

This stimulating article by Dr. Gregory first appeared in the October 1972 issue of Celestron Techniques, Volume 1 No. 4. I would be interested in hearing from any members who have attempted daylight observations such as those described by Dr. Gregory.

---

# A PHOTOGRAPHIC MAP OF THE HEAVENS BY: DON MACHHOLZ

A few years ago I made a sky photographic map of the night-time sky permit you to use it like a map to undertake such a project. I used simple equipment. It took several months, and the result is a set of color slides showing all the stars down to eighth magnitude.

First, I divided the whole observable sky down to my southern horizon at -33 degrees into 78 sections. Each section was to be photographed on a single frame, so I kept them rectangular and no larger than 30 deg. by 20 deg.

Six patterns of sections were used for the North Star. A declination of +85 sections, 12 sections were used for the declinations +80 through +70 (+70 to +40) 40 deg. I split the sky into 48 sections (4x12) and below -40 deg. I had ten sections.

Next, I took the pictures. For the photographs I used my 35mm Single lens reflex camera and a 60 day run tripod, or mounted the camera on a tripod with a clock drive, or just piggyback on the telescope. I found that when the camera was on the telescope (mounted equatorially), it was easier to aim. Each picture was using a 55mm lens on most sites. The exposure was 25 seconds long. The color was Tri-X or Kodachrome II. The equatorial. The slides were even developed commercially.

Finally, I put them all into one slide tray so now they are whole visible sky all my fingertips. I really haven't intended to use them, but the learning experience helped me plan and carry out this endeavor.

Alternatives to this plan could include a photo of each constellation, these would probably appear more attractive than my set. Or one could photograph a planet (minor) every few years or so, etc. Once again, only simple equipment is needed, so taking these types of astrophotos is a snap.

=== PAGE 4 ===
# SPACE UPDATE

## BY ROBERT FINGERHUT

### SHUTTLE COMPLETES MISSION 41-G

The shuttle orbiter Challenger landed safely at the Kennedy Space Center on Oct. 13. Among the accomplishments of the 7 member crew was the first extra vehicular activity by a woman Satellite (ERBS), designed to measure amount of solar radiation Earth returns to space. The SIR-B shuttle imaging radar was used to provide high-resolution imagery of ground surface features and to detect features 2-6 meters below the surface. It was used in a test to locate hidden water resources believed located on the border between Saudi Arabia and Oman and to find unmapped sedimentary bases in northern Kenya where evidence of early man could be found. A large format camera, which uses 8X18" film, was used to return images which will be used for geologic mapping studies. A French geologist spent time observing and documenting features in the ocean and on surface terrain. Refueling techniques needed to rescue the Landsat 4 satellite were demonstrated in a space walk.

### DISCOVERY SCHEDULED FOR LAUNCH ABOUT NOV. 5

The next shuttle mission, 51-A, is planned for 6 days. The crew will include Frederick H. Hauck, Commander; David M. Walker, Pilot; and mission specialists Anna L. Fisher, Dale A Gardner, and Joseph P. Allen. Their mission will include recovery of the Palapa B-2 and Westar 6 communication satellites by use of the ANIK and LEASAT communication satellites and the operation of the continuous flow electrophoresis experiment and materials science laboratory.

---

## ATM coatings

**15022 BROADWAY TERRACE, OAKLAND, CA 94611**

Specializing in Aluminum Coatings with silicon monoxide over-coating for telescope mirrors.

|  | |
|---|---|
| 4¼" | $8.00 |
| 6" | $12.00 |
| 8" | $16.00 |
| 10" | $20.00 |
| 12½" | $24.00 |
| 14¼" | $28.00 |
| 16" | $50.00 |

Secondaries, when sent with primary mirror, free.

To remove old coatings $3.00. Minimum charge $8.00

Include postage and insurance for return mail.

Mirror will be shipped in container received

---

### COSMONAUTS END RECORD STAY ON SALYUT 7

Cosmonauts Leonid Kizin, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov landed their Soyuz T-11 spacecraft on Oct. 2 after 237 days in orbit. The old record was 211 days.

### ASTEROID FLYBY BY GALILEO POSSIBLE

NASA has tentatively approved a trajectory for the Galileo Jupiter orbiter/probe mission which would allow a flyby of the asteroid Amphitrite. Galileo would encounter the 10,000 ton asteroid on Dec. 1, 1986, at a closest distance of 6200 miles. The highest imaging resolution would be 656 ft. and up to 5 of its 5 hour rotations could be observed.

### SPACE TELESCOPE'S OPTICAL TELESCOPE ASSEMBLY COMPLETED

Final partial tests have been completed by Perkin-Elmer Corp. The telescope is scheduled for shipment to Lockheed in Nov. for final component assembly and verification tests. It will be flown in by a Super Guppy aircraft to Moffett Field. The Space Telescope is scheduled for launch on Mission 61-J in August 1986.

### EARTH OBSERVING SATELLITE CO. (EOSAT) SELECTED TO OPERATE THE LANDSAT SPACECRAFT

EOSAT will take over operation of LANDSAT 4 and 5 immediately and will build and launch LANDSAT 6 AND 7 in 1988 and 1991.

### MEDLOCK 30" MIRROR SEES COMPLETION

After nearly 3 years of work, the highly touted 30" Medlock mirror has completed final figuring. Telescope maker Kevin Medlock has a very smooth quarter wave parabola...work on the mounting has already begun.

---

## ASTRO MART

**Make offer:** All parts for 6" reflector. Includes 2 mirrors (1 rough grinding begun), Edmund driven mount, all components for tube assembly, camera adapter, eyepieces for tube open. Contact: Mark Yamonaka. (408) 248-2284 home, or (408) 429-8062 (UCSC).

**For Sale:** 300mm f/5.6 Celestron Mirror/Lens telescope, Nikon new mirror and extra 2901 new lens, camera recently overhauled by $901 of San Francisco. Equipment like new. $575. Contact Steve Greenberg (415) 443-6638 eves or (415) 422-1606 days.

### CLUB TELESCOPE

David York currently has the clubs 14" Dobson telescope. If you are interested in using it, than please contact David at 1233 45th Ave., San Jose, CA. 95125. (408) 947-7579.

---

**SIAA EPHEMERIS**  
**3509 CALICO AVE**  
**SAN JOSE, CA 95124**

---

> **BULK RATE**  
> **U.S. POSTAGE PAID**  
> **PERMIT NO. 5381**  
> **SAN JOSE, CA. 95125**

---

**TIME VALUE—DATED**  
**NEWS MATERIAL**