=== PAGE 1 ===
# SJAA EPHEMERIS

**VOLUME 4 NUMBER 7 OFFICIAL PUBLICATION OF THE SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION JULY 1993**

## The Eye Piece

Lunatics descend on mountainside near San Bernadino
by Jack Zelder

Or so the headline would scream if one of the tabloid programs that are proliferating on the tube were to have covered the RTMC weekend. I made the trek this year and there was a large number of BIG scopes entertaining the die hards who went though a bright first quarter moon glare that made observing difficult, increasingly so each succeeding night. We had several 24" - 30" scopes and a 40" was also there. Most of these had long lines of folks eager to look through the biggies. I had the pleasure of using a fine 12" f/6 and 24" f/5 most of Friday evening. When the moon set about it got darker but the typical RTMC seeing was in full effect. Someone described Camp Oaks as a sub--armitude site, I think he had it right. Look for photos from RTMC at September slide and equipment night.

I received a call from Irene Wing of the Chinese Summer Festival which will be held at the San Jose Historical Museum near Kelly park on July 25th. She has requested a telescope to be setup and operated during the day for the visitors to the festival. Most of the usual gang that handle these events will

---

**July 3:** No activity

**July 10:** General Meeting 8:00 pm at the Milpitas Library. Board of Directors Meeting 6:15 pm. Speaker Rich Combs on Eyepieces

**July 17:** Star Party at H. Coe or Grant Ranch, 12%Moon, Mset 19:04, Sset 20:28.

**July 23/24:** Star Party at Yosemite. Contact Jim Van Nuland for reservations. This is a party you must go to at least once. There are great skies! Sset 8:18; Mset 10:55 and 11:31; Morning AstronTwilte at 4:21. Friday at noon set Sagittarius will be well clear of the trees.

**July 31:** Seventh session of Observational Astronomy, £pm at the Milpitas Library.

**Aug 7** No activity.

**Aug 14 Picnic at Fremont Peak; replaces the general meeting. Call Paul Barton (phone # on the credit marque pg 7) if you will attend so we can get a head count for burgers and dogs. You should bring something extra.**

Sset 7:58, Atwi 9:34. Moon, 8% rises 4:01 am. No Host star partys for stay at home folks

**Aug 20** Star Party, Houge Park. Sset 8:23 pm, 28% moon sets 10:54 pm.

**Aug 21** Star party at H. Coe or Grant Ranch. Sset 8:25, 2% moon rises 5:14 am.

**Aug 28** Eighth session of Observational Astronomy Class, 8 pm at the Milpitas Library.

---

be at Yosemite that weekend so we are looking for a volunteer to help out. These events are a lot of fun, you get to meet many nice people, chat about your favorite hobby, and show off your toys.

Call Irene at (408) 926-1785.

Don't forget our annual picnic is coming up this August 14th at Fremont Peak. The club will provide burgers and dogs for our members, everything else is a pot luck, bring something to share and have fun. Frank Dibboll of the FPOA asks that everyone not plan on parking behind the rangers house and be forewarned of the second great super soaker battle.

John Wright is now digging out from under the tax season business load and is going to be working hard on the SJAA/Grant Ranch Observatory proposal and project. Once things get worked out I think the public, Grant Ranch Park and the SJAA will benefit by bringing a fine public oriented astronomy facility online. Perhaps like a smaller version of the Fremont Peak program that has brought heightened awareness of astronomy and much positive public attention to that Park, we will be able to contribute to Grant Ranch and our local community as well.

**Star Parties (continued from pg 4)** stars - binaries, real and visual, including the Twin's Castor and Pollux, Beta Cygnus, Alberio, Barnard's star, etc. (where does Jack find all this good stuff?)

The slide show, Jack Zelder's photos, included Bootes, Hercules, Ophiuchus, Coma Borealis, Serpens Caput and Libra.

We finished about 10:30 after and other fine session. You know, these sessions require planning and work. After the class Jack backed-up his truck to the door of the library to load in the instructional material, while Lady went for a walk after a nice sleep in her little Mustang.

---

**Officers • Pres. Jack Zeiders • Vice Pres. Paul Mancuso • Tres. Jack Peterson • Sec. Jim Van Nuland • Editors Bob Madden and Paul Barton**

=== PAGE 2 ===
# Bill and Jeff's "GETTING MOST of It TOGETHER" by Jeff Horne

In the April SJAA Ephemeris Rich Neuschaefer gave us a fine list of items he uses to aid in observing. While this seems to work well for Rich, Bill Cooke and I have a somewhat different view of what's needed. You may want to refer back to Rich's list for comparison. Our list is generated from a decade and a half of experience at various observing sites through all sorts of great and hopeless nights.

Observing Tool List and the Stuff WE Use

## Telescope Tools:

### Eyepieces and Filters:

We have used the whole gambit from Naglers to Plossls. However, one of our favorites for planets is a 12.5mm Ramsden that cost 50 cents. I have an old LPR filter we use sparingly.

### Finders and Diagonals:

Telrads we like, they're simple and not over priced like the high tech ones. I like a straight through finder and the stiff neck that goes with it, Bill prefers the reversed, upside down elbow finder. He can do the mental coordinate transformations that just leave me confused. A set of digital setting circles is on my "dream list", but Bill has deep philosophical reservations about such devices.

### Battery:

If we don't bring the new Sears lawn and garden battery, the battery in Bill's truck works just fine for driving the 6 inch Astrophysics refractor. Besides you can always start the truck by rolling down Fremont Peak anyway.

### Alignment Tools:

We use an old Coulter aluminum plug with a small hole in the center and a Ronchi screen in the top of a plastic 35mm film container. However, wandering around Fremont Peak playing the "collimation patrol" doesn't win one many friends.

### Vibration Dampening Pads:

I always thought you got rid of vibration by setting up in the dirt. Actually, we both own a set of pads we bought from Kevin at a swap meet, but I can't figure out how to keep an eyepiece stuck in one of them. They do make nice coasters.

### Cleaning stuff:

A camera lens brush or an old Tshirt and plenty of hot air. A can of ozone killing compressed gas works on the hard to reach areas. Windex is much better on mirrors than spit. But in a pinch you can clean an eyepiece by licking it. At Riverside we once saw someone using a condom to keep the dust out of the focuser.

### Photo Equipment:

A manual 35mm with several different lenses, fast film, and a wide range of explicatives to yell at car headlights.

### Tools:

We usually carry a screw driver and a big pair of pliers. If Bill takes his refractor we need some kind of allen wrenches too. Chapstick will serve as an emergency lubricant if your Dobson rocker box is too tight against the base sides. My small Swiss pocket knife works well for most things including opening chip bags, cleaning battery terminals, and carving up a burrito heated on the engine manifold.

### Clothes:

A baseball cap works well, except in the winter a pull over hat is warmer. A good jacket is nice and we always say we should buy some. Ski bibs we don't use because ours don't fit any more. Gloves are good, especially if we remember to bring them. Bill's

dream method of staying warm has something to do with Paula Abul, that's another story. A sweat shirt with a hood keeps the mosquitos off of Bill. I prefer to smell like bug spray.

### Food and Drink:

If it isn't greasy or sticky, we don't want it. Our standard observing food is Pepsi and little chocolate donuts (LDJs). We also have a fondness for my wife's fresh baked, still warm, crescent rolls or chocolate chip cookies. Remember to close up your food unless you like to be good buddies with the raccoons. You'll find us driving to Fremont Peak with slurpees from the 7-11 in Gilroy and maybe a bagel dog. Bill can eat and drive at the same time if I hold the wheel. We use the whole road in this manuever so stay clear!

### Other Stuff:

We both have the new Celestron red LED flashlights. Star charts are Uranometria, and Sky Atlas 2K. The new Uranometria field guide is wonderful: for avoiding looking for things we can't see anyway. The tailgate of the pickup truck makes a good table, and any folding chair will do. Napkins from our 7-11 stop are good for keeping clean, and Repel 100 bug repellent adds a nice piquant spiciness to the donuts. We don't like radios as we prefer silence, or good conversation. Our taste in jokes is definitely questionable. [I'll agree to that ... Ed]

[THIS IS FIGURE: Drawing of a telescope on a tripod mount with various accessories]

---

**EPHEMERIS**

**Page 2**

**July 1993**

=== PAGE 3 ===
# Callco Observatory
3509 Callco Ave.
San Jose, CA 95124
(408) 371-1307
1993 May 6

Our monthly **Sky & Telescope** and **Astronomy** magazines are important means for keeping up on what's happening, astronomically speaking. Comet discoveries, supernovae, and the like would benefit from faster communication. But a subscription to the SAO Notices from Brian Marsden's office costs something like $100 a year!

Cheaper, and only a little less timely than SAO notices, are the computer Bulletin Board Systems. Other than the cost of a modem, many BBSs are free, and they are probably a local phone call, too. There are a whole lot of BBSs, but not all carry astronomy sections. Here are those that I've found in the San Jose area. Most are free, and support off-line mail reading and fast modems.

A board that has only messages from its own callers tends to be rather limited. However, there are many networks of BBSs — they exchange public messages and private mail, and so will have participants from all over the country, and some from outside the USA as well. All of the following are networked discussions.

The Higher Powered BBS, (408) 737-7040 — carries two astronomy areas, from the Ilink and SFnet networks; they are area 127 and 223. Each has about 10 to 20 messages per day. Ilink has a transcription of Sky & Telescope's current telephone news line.

Flying Dutchman BBS, (408) 286-5701 — from the RIME network, area 43, carries the daily notices from NASA, covering the shuttle preparation and on-orbit news, as well as status of various other spacecraft. Of course, there are messages from general participants, too.

Temporary Insomniac's BBS, (408) 866-0640 — also carries the RIME astronomy area (see above). Area 41.

Data Port BBS (408) 259-3019 — smaller array of message areas, but it includes the FidoNet astronomy echo. This is my personal favorite.

There is more observational discussion here than on the others, and the moderator, having a newly-minted PhD in Astrophysics, keeps the highend physics on track (i.e., correct). About 30 messages a day.

PCS-BBS (408) 270-4085 — This is the only local board I've found that carries SCI.ASTRO, the Usenet astronomy forum, populated by folks from JPL, NASA, universities, and so on. BUSY! there may be 100 or more a day, many very large, sometimes rather specialized. Area 36.

This is a pay board, but they will allow a new caller 20 minutes to look around. Capture bulletin 11 and print it. Filled out and mailed, it will get you 15 days free access, after which they want $25/year. But it's a restricted kind of access, even at $25, unless one pays an additional $3/month for Usenet. With the free access, I can read messages on-line and capture them, but I can't get to the mail doors, so it's a bit slow. I don't know if I can post messages. All of these boards carry a bewildering variety of other discussions. I read the USRobotics forum when I was getting acquainted with my new (USR) modem. There are areas for most software packages, many hobbies, and social issues. One could spend hours every evening. Most is of fairly high quality.

Just a few words about software — all these boards have an enormous selection of programs of all kinds and purposes, some of it very good. Most is shareware (try before you register and send money), and others are free. Often, updated drivers are available for video cards, mice, etc.

With the price of 2400 baud modems down below $50, and 14,400 available at $210, BBS access is cheaper than ever. Internal versions cost somewhat less.

A very useful development in the BBS world is called an "Off-line Reader". The traditional way is to call a board, and read each message then and there, replying to some along the way. This ties up the phone lines for an hour at at time. Many boards now have a facility to package the new messages from each of your selected forums, and send them in a single, compressed file.

This takes about 2 minutes of phone time.

With a program on your computer, each message is read, replies are composed, all without having to hurry. Replies are packaged into a single file. Then a second call is made to the board, and the reply package goes up in a single operation, taking perhaps a minute. This way, even when paying toll call charges, it's still relatively inexpensive.

I can supply the necessary modem program (OMODEM) and the off-line reader (SLMR) for IBM-class machines. Catch me at the July meeting.

Clear Skies,
Jim Van Nuland

---

## The Lick 36" Refractor
by Rich Neuschaefer

I have contacted Alicia Good Assistant to the Director at Lick Observatory regarding a field trip to the Clark 36" refractor for an evening of viewing. There are two resident astronomers at Lick where one will be our host. The starting time is between 4:30 and 7:00 p.m. The size of the group can not be larger than 40 people. [This will be a large enough group - if every one views for a minute each - your second look will be 40 minutes after the last, and we all know that each one of us will spend more than a minute at the eyepiece! . . . ed.] I have been advised that we can submit a list of objects we wish to see before we arrive and the our host will attempt to have them for us to view. What an opportunity for some of us to be able to use the second largest refractor in the world and with which many great discoveries have been made. I propose we limit the group size to not more than 25 which will bring the cost to $10 each. Paul Barton suggests that we car pool up to Mt. Hamilton because of limited parking space at the observatory. If you are interested contact me at home (408)-446-0975 or work (408)-285-6818.

---

**Wanted - for our telescope loaner program:** A Super Polaris GE Mount to replace our current (shakey) mount used with the Solar Telescope.

---

**EPHEMERIS**

**Page 3**

**July 1993**

=== PAGE 4 ===
# DOUBLE, TRIPLE, AND MULTIPLE STARS
by Pat Donnelly

The May issue of **Astronomy** magazine had an article on constellation Bootis (the Herdsman), that contained descriptions of several double stars within its boundaries. I do agree that Epsilon Bootis is an exceptional double and should be observed. However, I think the article missed most of the really good doubles and triples in Bootis. Hopefully this article can be used as a supplement to the Astronomy article.

Begin your tour of Bootis with 1-Bootis (∑1772). 1-Bootis is located about half way between Arcturus and M64. It is a true binary system consisting of magnitude 6 & 9 companions, separated by about 5". Both stars appear white to me. With the 8-inch SCT I could resolve the star into the pair with 117X. While in this area center your scope on Arcturus. Just north of Arcturus is a pretty pair called ∑1825. ∑1825 consists of magnitude 7 & 8.5 stars, separated by 5". I see these stars as both blur in color. ∑1825 is also a true binary system, and because of its nearness to Arcturus, it is a snap to find in the sky.

Due north of Arcturus near Eta Ursa Majoris is a nest of double star delights. The two most prominent pairs are Kappa Bootis and Iota Bootis. Kappa consists of magnitude 4.5 & 6.5 components separated by 13.3". This means that Kappa should be easy to resolve in just about any telescope. Near Kappa is Iota. Iota consists of magnitude 5 & 7.5 components, separated by a whole 39". Both Kappa and Iota are true binary systems, and these two stars are good doubles for beginners due to their separations. Near Kappa and Iota are a host of dimmer doubles. Included in this list are ∑1871, ∑1869, 39-Bootis, and ∑1843. All of these doubles should be resolvable in a 6" telescope under high power.

Next move down to the region of Delta Bootis. Delta is a very wide double of approximately 105". I have resolved this star with binoculars, but it is still a pretty sight in a telescope. Delta's components are magnitude 3.5 & 7.5, and the system is a true binary system.

Going further south you arrive at Xi-Bootis. Xi is also a true binary system consisting of magnitude 5 & 7 components. Their separation is about 7", so they should be resolvable in a 3-inch telescope. I have seen this pair as both orange-red in color.

If you want to observe more do the list in the Astronomy article that includes Epsilon, Nu, Mu Pi and Zeta-Bootis, ∑1850, ∑1910, and ∑1835. Mu-Bootis is always a fun triple to observe under high power. Also, both Zeta and Pi-Bootis have faint companions making them observable triples. With such a long list one could spend an entire evening just observing binary star systems in Bootis.

---

## Star Parties
by Paul Barton

### Fremont Peak - Sat. 22 May 1993

This was another grand outing!! We had fine weather — clear, warm, fog - below, dark. The Milky Way looked liked a cloud. Practically all telescope spaces were taken and there were a few campers. There may have been as many as 50 telescopes, almost all different and 75 to 100 people. There was a fine sliver of moon which went down before dark. A big attraction was the super nova in M81, found by Mark Wagner, 8" Dob, Rich Neuschaefer, 18" Dob, and others. The Veil nebulae was observed using an O-3 filter, bright and clear. The viewing was near perfect for this part of the world. The sign-in sheet is far from complete, but the following is a list of some who were there.

Dolories and Terry Stiner
Mark Wagner and family
Paul and Lady Barton
Charles Chen and Patti Bossert
Aron Chew
Dean Linebarger
Jim Eiselt
Richard Navarrete
Allan Nelams
John Bettencourt
Charlie and Susan Wicks
Larry and Marty Wayne
John Kulkwicz
Rich Neuschaefer
Ron Sheldrup and Katie Peters

Mitsuaki Hirono
Bill Cook
Jerry and Jeff Horne
Dave Wright
Ken Ward
Dave and Kristen Smith
Jack Zelder

### Houge Park - Fri. 28 May 1993

Another fine outing. We were lucky to get this one in as the weather was bad both before and after, but come friday evening the clouds dispersed and we had a fine view of the sky. The moon was about half (1st quarter). We had about about a dozen telescopes and at least 50 observers including many small fry. One young man helped set up and operate the JMI-18. Young eyes can pick out faint stars that require optical help for oldsters. Observed were Jupiter, Mars, the Moon, Globular clusters, M13, M5, and M92 and a few others. The sprinklers started in across the park around 10 p.m. , as we were leaving. Crazy Ed Erbeck didn't have to do his one foot rain dance standing on the sprinkler head.

---

## Observational Astronomy
### Milpitas Library Sat. 29 May 1993

The fifth observational Astronomy Class met in the Milpitas Library at 8 p.m. There were an even dozen star gazers, most of them familiar faces. Jack Petersen, the speaker, started off with a two foot photo of the moon, pointing out various features and correlating them with our "bible" — the 1993 Observer's Handbook by the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada, Roy L. Bishop Editor. It is fantastic how much data is in this handbook.

The subject was so interesting to all of us, we stayed on it for nearly an hour, the planned subjects had to wait. We discussed lunar and solar eclipses, including annular solar eclipses. Jack has traveled to far away places and observed many fine solar eclipses. (will he be able to do this now he's "in-harness"?)

By nine o'clock we got down to business with a discussion of double *Continued on page 1*

---

**EPHEMERIS**
**Page 4**
**July 1993**

=== PAGE 5 ===
# MAP TO FREMONT PEAK STATE PARK AND THE 14 AUGUST B-B-Q

## PLEASE DO NOT PARK BEHIND THE RANGER'S HOUSE

---

**Fremont Peak STATE PARK**
(408) 623-4255

30" TELESCOPE/OBSERVATORY

**BBQ SITE**

**REST ROOMS**

FROM SAN JUAN BAUTISTA

**Channel B TV Scatter**

**FREMONT PEAK**

**AREA TO TOP OF PEAK HEART USED BY COUNTY / WALK UP**

**UPPER PARKING LOT**

**To Observatory (LOWER)**

**Main Parking Lot** PARK HERE! { WALK UP TO BBQ SITE IF YOU WANT OR JUST AFTER BBQ DRIVE UP ALL HIKERS YOU MAY DRIVE UP TO TOP OF PEAK AFTER BBQ - YOU WALK UP TO FILL OBSERVATORY.}

**OVERFLOW AREA (NORMALLY OPEN)**

**Home**

**Quiver Creek (INTERESTING SITE)**

**Watching Area**

**THIS INTERSECTION MAY CONFUSE YOU.**
**KEEP TO LEFT**

**Owl Gulch**
**Overlook**

**PARK HERE IF YOU WISH AND WALK UP TO FREMONT PEAK FIRE LOOKOUT STA. AND BE OPEN TILL MIDNIGHT RED DRESS.**

**SAN JUAN CANYON RD.**

TO **MONTEREY** →

**Front exit**
**Monterey-Salinas**
**Freeway From Salinas**

**Mexican Hill**
**101 Santa Rd**

**TRADITIONAL WALK UP BBQ Pot Luck SUPPER (7:30PM). BBQ BE OPEN TILL MIDNIGHT RED DRESS (WHEN A HINT A HINT.**

**A. RED FLASHLIGHT IS HELPFUL ON THE DARK PARK AT PHOTOGRAPHY RUN PACKS. PLEASE ALSO FILL IN GATE**

**TRADITIONAL OBSERVING CAMP AREA (TENTS, PROPYL LOOKING, ETC)**

**! Questions Call Jack Zeiders (408) 241-9338 (Same Message)**

---

**and More ASTRO ADDS**

**ACHROMATIC OBJECTIVES 5" f/8.6** lens in aluminum cell; figured by D&G Optical - $375. 4.75" f/4.8 lens, without a cell - $60. 4" f/5 lense without cell - $50. 4" f/8 (approx) lense, unknown quality and airspace, with out cell - $25. William Cooke (W) (408) 492-45640 (H) (408) 295-6560 7/93

**ZOOM EYEPIECE**, excellent, Orion brand. Seven elements, fully coated, very sharp images. Zoom ratio 3 to 1, from 21 mm to 7 mm (apparent field from 35° to

65°). Fits 1-1/4 inch focusers. Cost $160 new, will sell for $100 or best offer. Edward Hillyer (209) 931-0486 7 pm to 9:30 pm Stockton 7/93

**Celestron Ultima 8 w/hand controler.** All in mint condition - $1850. Call Patrice Larson at (408) 736-2153 7/93

**Ride Needed** - Senior Citizen in Cupertino needs a ride to meetings. Willing to use own car, but needs someone along. George J Glumac
10411 Tonita Way
Cupertino (408) 252-9266

**FOR YOUR INFORMATION - When ordering material from** *Sky and Telescope* **ask for a 10% discount given to club members. Nothing else is needed**

**Thanks** to all of the members who donated to the eyepiece fund and telescope loaner program. The loaner program is now in excellent shape for eyepieces and finders. As the loaner telescopes are returned they will be upgraded.

Paul Barton

---

**EPHEMERIS Page 5 July 1993**

=== PAGE 6 ===
# 1993 SJAA Calendar

| General Meeting | Houge Park | Observational Astronomy Class |
|----------------|------------|------------------------------|
| July 10 | 23 | 31 |
| Aug 14 Picnic | 20 | 28 |
| Sept 4 Slide/Equip night | 24 | 25 |
| Oct 2 | 22 | 30 Last one |
| Nov 20 | 19 | none |
| Dec 18 | 17 | none |

**Please read your** *Ephemeris* **each month for changes**

---

## ASTRO ADS

**ASTRO ADS** are free to all noncommercial advertisers wishing to sell astronomically related products or services. Please send your ad directly to the Editor:

Bob Madden  
1616 Inglis Lane  
San Jose, Ca. 95118-2825

**NO LATER THAN THE 12th OF EACH MONTH!** Your Astro Ad will run approximately 3-months.

---

**Televue 24 MM** wide angle eyepiece - new condition - $100 **Cold Camera,** Rudy Kokich, for 35 mm roll film - new condition - $100 Dr. Kenneth Lunan (408)-293-2218 6/93

**8" Dia** handmade lens, **6"Dia** lens, and smaller eyepiece lenses. Call Ms. Marina Luisa Green Mond-Sun Noon till 10 PM (415) 366-2847. Allow for many rings! 6/93

**Meade 8",** W/Starbright coating, German Eq Mt. Metal accessory case, 26mm, 40mm, 13mm eyepieces. Piggie-back camera mount, T-ring camera adapter, and eyepiece projection system. Great telescope at $1200 for everything. Call Maria Petersen at (408) 262-1457. 6/93

**3.5 inch Questar** and Linhof deluxe pan head - heavy duty tripod - each in excellent condition. Each have a carrying case. Today's cost of each is $3145 and $1550. Include a shipping container and camera attachment. Will sell for $2400. Mrs Burnadette Stubbs  
11275 Chula Vista  
San Jose, Ca 95127  
or telephone (408) 259-2193 7/93

**Televue 24 MM** wide angle eyepiece - new condition - $100 **Cold Camera,** Rudy Kokich, for 35 mm roll film - new condition - $100 Dr. Kenneth Lunan, 1064 Broadway Ave, San Jose, Ca 95125 6/93

**Meade 8" SC** 2080 LX3 w/tripod, Meade model 36 Sing/Dual axis control box, Meade Super Plossl 9.7 mm and 26 mm eyepieces, 1.8X Barlow, blue, red, polarizing filters, telrad, dew zapper, cap and shield, 45° roof prism, star diagonal metal accessory case, telescope foam box, and more. Used only 5 times. $1000 call Rob at (408) 262-2783 7/93

---

![Drawing of telescope equipment with various accessories]

## SJAA Loaner Status
by Paul Barton

| Size | Type | Name | Due Date |
|------|------|------|----------|
| 4-1/2" | Newt/P mount | David Liao | 8/5/93 |
| 6" | Dobson | Bob Dow | 8/6/93 |
| 4" | Quantum | Nagin Cox | 7/8/93 |
| 60mm | Cometron Ref. | Gabriel Stoll | 8/10/93 |
| C-8 | Celestron | John Schoenerberger | 7/16/93 |
| 12-1/2" | Dobson | available - a heavy instrument call if int. | |
| 14" | Dobson | in shop for modification | |
| 6" | Newt/P mount | D. Petree | 6/24/93 |
| 8" | Dobson | Mark Wagner | 7/4/93 |
| 8" | Newt/P Mount | Chung-Lin Lee | 8/4/93 |

Solar telescope. Available only to experienced members for special occasions such as day time public star parties, etc. Call.

(on waiting list)

| Name | Telescope |
|------|-----------|
| Ken Ward | Any |
| J. P. Da Silvia | Any |
| Dave Simmons | C-8 |
| Nagin Cox | 8" Newt/P Mount |

If you want to borrow a telescope call Paul Barton (number is on the credit Marque) and get your name on a general list (any telescope) or on a specific telescope list.

---

*Continued on page 5*

---

**EPHEMERIS** Page 6 July 1993

=== PAGE 7 ===
# CELESTIAL CALENDAR
## July 1993

### LunarPhases Date Rise Trans Set
- FM 16:45hr 03-7 2025 0101 0656
- LQ 15:50hr 11-7 0023 0657 1337
- NM 04:24hr 19-7 0625 1315 2009
- FQ 20:26hr 26-7 1324 1838 2355

### Nearer Planets

**Mercury**
- 0-7-7 0700 1351 2046
- 0.60 AU 17-7 0556 1251 1942
- Mag +1.00 27-7 0500 1151 1844

**Venus**
- 0-7-7 0308 1002 1701
- 0.99 AU 17-7 0306 1007 1712
- Mag -4.7 27-7 0307 1012 1723

**Mars**
- 2.10 AU 0-7-7 0957 1629 2304
- 0-7-7 0950 1514 2240
- Mag +1.20 27-7 0945 1559 2217

**Jupiter**
- 5.67 AU 0-7-7 1226 1822 0021
- 17-7 1153 1748 2344
- Mag -1.9 27-7 1121 1713 2309

**Saturn**
- 8.96 AU 0-7-7 2237 0356 0915
- 17-7 2156 0315 0833
- Mag +0.50 27-7 2115 0233 0750

**SOL Star Type G2V Mag - 26.72**
- RA DEC
- 0707 2232 0-7-7 0543 1258 201:
- 0748 2107 17-7 0547 1257 2011
- 0826 1912 27-7 0553 1255 2002

### Astronomical Twilight Dawn Dusk
- JD 2,449,175.5 0-7-7 0402 - 2222
- .185.5 17-7 0412 - 2215
- .195.5 27-7 0424 - 2204

### Sidereal Time
- Transit Right 0-7-7 0000 PDT=1753
- Ascention at 17-7 0000 PDT=1632
- Local Midnight 27-7 0000 PDT=1912

### Darkest Saturday Night July 17
- Sunset 2028
- Twilight End 2215
- Moon Set 1904
- Moon rise next morning 0513

**TIMES AND DATES ARE PACIFIC DAYLIGHT**
by Richard Stanton

Times are Local Civil
Derivation of these values are from
*Astronomy with Your Personal Computer*
by Peter Duffet-Smith
*MacEphem*
by Elwood Charles Downey

---

## Offices and Board of Directors

**Pres: Jack Zelders -** 408-261-0220  
**Vice Pres: Paul Mancuso** 408-946-0738  
**Treas: Jack Petersen-** 408-262-1457  
**Sec: Jim Van Nuland-** 408-371-1307  
**Dir: Gene Claneroa-** 408-923-6800  
**Dir: Bob Brauer-** 408-292-7695  
**Dir: Jim Hodgers-** 408-287-2324  
**Dir: Paul Barton-** 408-377-0148  
**Dir: Bob Madden-** 408-264-4488  

### Ephemeris Contributors

**Don Machholz -** 916-346-8963  
**Pat Donnelly -** 408-778-2741  
**Richard Stanton -** 408-662-0205  
**Paul Barton -** 408-377-0148  
**Jeff Horne -** 408-238-5563  
**Jim Van Nuland-** 408-371-1307  

### Editor

**Bob Madden -** 408-264-4488

---

## Comet Comments
### by Don Machholtz

Several faint comets have been recovered, with two new ones discovered. Meanwhile, Periodic Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 continues to draw attention.

**Periodic Comet Shoemaker- Levy 9 (1993e):** This strange object, the "string of pearls" comet, remains in the vicinity of Jupiter. The latest orbit calculation indicates that it was close to Jupiter (0.0008 AU from the center in July 1992. This caused the comet to split into many pieces. A year from now, in late July 1994, it is expected to get even closer - 0.0003 AU distant. Since Jupiter is 0.005 Au in radius, the present theory is that at least some of the many nuclei will collide with Jupiter itself. Predicted positions for the comet are printed below. Although the comet is faint, you may wish to attempt photographic or CCD imaging of it.

**Periodic Comet Shoemaker- Levy 9 (1993h):** Carolyn and Eugene Shoemaker and David Levy discovered this comet on plates exposed through the 18-inch Schmidt at Mt. Palomar on May 23. The comet was then at magnitude 17 and is expected to remain faint as it stays at least 5 AU from the sun.

**Periodic Comet Holmes (1993i):** T Seki of Japan recovered this comet using photographic equipment on May 24. Already past perihelion, it will remain faint.

**Periodic Comet Neuimin 3 (1993j):** Jim Scotti of the Lunar and Planetary Laboratory at Kitt Peak recovered this comet on May 25 at magnitude 21. It will not get much brighter.

**Periodic Comet Sajn-Schaldach (1993k):** Jim Scotti also recovered this faint comet. It has an orbital period of 7.5 years but will remain beyond amateur's telescopes.

**Comet Helin-Lawrence (1993l):** E. Helin, K. Lawrence and M. Nassir exposed plated on the 18-inch Palomar Schmidt to discover this comet on May 17. It was at magnitude 17, but the orbit has not been completed.

---

## EPHEMERIS

### PERIODIC COMET SHOEMAKER-LEVY 9 (1993e)

DATE(000T) R.A. (2000) DEC. ELONG SKY MAG

| Date | R.A. | DEC. | ELONG | SKY | MAG |
|------|------|------|-------|-----|-----|
| 06-22 | 12h00.3m | -03°02' | 91° | E | 13.6 |
| 06-27 | 12h02.2m | -03°09' | 82° | E | 13.6 |
| 07-02 | 12h03.9m | -03°16' | 82° | E | 13.7 |
| 07-07 | 12h06.1m | -03°26' | 78° | E | 13.7 |
| 07-12 | 12h08.4m | -03°37' | 74° | E | 13.7 |
| 07-17 | 12h10.9m | -03°49' | 70° | E | 13.7 |
| 07-22 | 12h13.7m | -04°02' | 65° | E | 13.8 |
| 07-27 | 12h16.5m | -04°17' | 61° | E | 13.8 |
| 08-01 | 12h19.6m | -04°32' | 57° | E | 13.8 |
| 08-06 | 12h22.8m | -04°47' | 53° | E | 13.8 |

Don Machholz (916) 346-8963

---

**EPHEMERIS Page 7 July 1993**

=== PAGE 8 ===
```markdown
**EPHEMERIS** is published monthly by the San Jose Astronomical Association - 3509 Calico Ave., San Jose California 95124, Members are encouraged to submit articles for publication. These should be typed and submitted **no later than the 12th of the previous month.** All submissions should be sent to the editor, Bob Madden, 1616 Inglis Lane, San Jose, California 95118. A text file on a 3-1/2" IBM or MAC diskette is preferred, but written is accepted.

# SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIP
## Membership only: $12 Membership / S&T: $32 Junior (under 18): $20

Name: _________________________________

Address: _________________________________
         _________________________________

Telephone: _________________________________

Please bring this form to any
SJAA Meeting or send to
Jack Petersen, Treasurer
San Jose Astronomical Assoc.
1840 Yosemite Drive
Milpitas, CA 95035
Telephone: (408) 262-1457

### MAKE CHECKS PAYABLE TO "SJAA"
Please check type of membership and if New or Renewal

Membership Only ___ Membership/S&T ___ Junior (under 18) ___
                   New ___ Renewal ___

---

**SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION**
**1840 YOSEMITE DRIVE**
**MILPITAS, CA. 95035**

ADDRESS CORRECTION REQUESTED

**NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION**

**U.S. POSTAGE PAID**

**PERMIT NO. 5381**

**SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA**

---

*SJAA HOTLINE*
*24 HOUR INFORMATION*
*408-559-1221*

---

**EPHEMERIS                                                   Page 8                                                   July 1993**
```

=== PAGE 9 ===
# UNIVERSE 93
## continued from page 2

### Sally Ride

the Audience with her talk and slide/video presentation about Observing Earth from Space. I was impressed by her knowledge of both the mechanics of the shuttle and duties while in space. She is a true Superwoman!

**Jon Strong** had not had planned to start our return drive to the Bay Area sometime around mid-day Sunday, but we chose to delay also a comprehensive discussion on Choosing a Telescope for Backyard Astronomy. He gave an informal talk and slide show. It was very easy to size up what kind of equipment to get from and buy used telescopes for $100 or less and really see what is a great value. Jon spent about an hour looking for Comet Shoemaker-Levy, which has since been torn apart by close encounter with the planet Jupiter and is entering a string of 17 tiny fragments. The remnants crash into Jupiter and possibly create enough of and explosion to illuminate outer Jovian clouds. The brightest showed several of Levy's comets across my front yard skies and I will surely watch the fireworks next July.

**We did seem an additional hour looking over the more than seventy exhibit booths inside Aztec Hall and meeting the editorial staff from Astronomy magazine and Robert Burnham. Associate Editors Alan Dyer, David Eicher, and Richard Talcott and former Editor, Richard Berry, Astronomy magazine has been very good to the novice amateur by publishing done by my astrophotographers. After all this, I must conclude this was one hel-luva astronomical show!**

### Key to Great CCD Images

The International CCD Society of CCD users was appropriate for a conference about CCD technology. It gathered several talks on issues relevant to CCD users, who talked about their work done on early 1981 Celestron and Apogee units, that performed better than many observers thought. Since many 'Spark' that "dodged the Universe, Stephen Edberg, who works for amateur astronomers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena NASA, has given a lecture on CCDs and Observing Stellar Eclipses' another subject dear to my heart. He covered a few things you wanted to know about eclipsing binary stars. In closing, I was disappointed with Jack Newton's lecture on Observing Jupiter from his Florida home base. He covered everything from his early days in astrophotography, mon-toring a CCD camera, to the latest images of 1998 Total Solar Eclipse. In another, somewhat informal talk about photography by Roy Bishop, also talked about his experiences with astrophotography and some of his deep sky image works, which were shown. It was appreciated by many who were interested in astronomy early on. The Saturn morning session started with Jack Newton's in-depth lectures on CCD Caliper/Beta v.1 and Polar Beam. It covered everything from his early days in astrophotography, monitoring his home for a large telescope, his new observatory home-office, and the color calibration, showing that due colors or calibrated colors which have been pre-defined all include astronomy color and astronomy "perfect" in one package. In a nutshell, Richard Berry's 100 min Los Angeles Comet conference was an important event which really benefited amateur astronomers by teaching them how to use modern day astrophotography techniques. As 'Jack was able to learn quite a bit of Charge Coupled Devices" in the Whirlpool Galaxy, M51. To create this video, he covered Image Brightness into a 3-dimensional cosmic editor, Richard Berry, who talked about Image Processing. The entire discussion on CCD cameras was appropriate by Roy Bishop and astrono-mic editor, Richard Berry, who talked about Image Processing. The entire discussion on CCD camera was important by Roy Bishop and astrono-astrono-

### David Levy

display of large and small optics. I looked like a kid in the shape of MST with two mountains to climb. The Saturn mirror and zoomed down and through the multitude of peaks and valleys. (See S&T, 1993, pg 95.)

**Job Strong** had not had planned to start our return drive to the Bay Area sometime around mid-day, but we chose to delay also a comprehensive discussion on Choosing a Telescope for Backyard Astronomy. She gave an informal talk and slide show. He gave me great value I decided to meet real expectations and rewrite it with the overall expedition experience, especially concerning Southern skies region. At-ter all this, I must conclude this was one hel-luva

### EPHEMERIS

**Page 3** September 1993

ride to the "Tropical Island" of the Whirlpool Galaxy, M51. To create this video, he covered Image Brightness into a 3-dimensional cosmic enhancements that have been improved modern day astrophotography to new levels. One of his presentation highlights was a 50-second fantasy ride to the "Tropical Island" of the Whirlpool Galaxy, M51. To create this video, he covered Image Brightness into a 3-dimensional

of CCD's to capture raw data in a matter of seconds, the removal of the system's inherent noise, and the color correction and other the system's inherent noise, and the color correction and other scientific improvements with digital photography. The enhancements display was appropriate by Roy Bishop, who talked about Image Processing. The entire discussion on CCD cameras was appropriate by Roy Bishop, and the CCD Caliper/Beta was an important session that could be appropriately to its 1991 Total Solar Eclipse. In another, somewhat informal talk about photographs of asteroids.

The Sunday morning session started with Jack Newton's on CCD Caliper/Beta version for Saturday between 4am. Ver-tion of all Saturday between 4am. Ver-sailles, and several at a professor at Rhodes College in Memphis, has written many asteroidals, and several at a professor at Rhodes College in Memphis, has written many comprehensive articles or small planets for Astronomy, such as: "The celestial sphere in Astronomy, such as Spark that published United Universe, Stephen Edberg, who works for astronomy lecture, also the most knowledgeable about asteroid research in Los Angeles on October and December. Another subject dear to my heart. He covered a few things you wanted to know about eclipsing binary stars. Such NASA's has allowed astronomers to see such phenomena. I am glad to have been there.

Decembre. We had anticipated looking at the optical tubes on the $38,751

It is the last session for Saturday between 4am. Ver-sailles, and several at a professor at Rhodes College in Memphis, has written many comprehensive articles and Sierra Street, and several expedition leaders made it quite our planned professional photography. After such day astrophotography to new levels.

**Next:** to Suburu for the 1991 Total Solar Eclipse.

In one of several expedition leaders made it quite our planned. I most up to Subaru for the 1991 Total Solar Eclipse. In another related lecture on early astronomy.

formed CCD's, National North Bay; Association; magazines has been very good to the over the world over the past several decades doing it. my next astronomy lectures related to CCD'S; it must conclude this was one hel-luva astronomica; show!