=== PAGE 1 ===
# SJAA EPHEMERIS

## IF YOU MISSED JOHN DOBSON

### Dave North

The guy who started the revolution in cheap everyman telescopes, John Dobson, dropped by for a chat with the Club May 9. If you were there, you hardly need to read this. If you weren't, you missed a lot of fun, controversy, and great stories.

Though the entire evening was presented as a question and answer session, he deftly steered the answers in the direction he planned all along — using a series of rhetorical devices. It was like watching a fan dance.

His talk broke down into four major categories: telescope making, public observing, cosmology and philosophy. The level of controversy increased with each segment.

What is there to say about Dobson's telescope designs? It started with President Ed Erbeck's introduction (which John interrupted several times to add little anecdotes): the design is not practical or suitable for most amateur astronomers, according to the editors of *Sky & Telescope* some years back. So much for their predictive skills.

John offered the additional opinion that white tubes are not good (just about any other color will do) since the titanium dioxide in them radiates infrared furiously, making them thermally inconsistent due to the cool sky and warm ground. (Of course, I paint my tubes white.)

*See* **Dobson**, p. 2

---

## JUNE

- **5** Houge park star party. Sunset 8:25 pm, 85% moonset 3:53 am.
- **6** General Meeting at Houge Park, 8 pm. Speaker will be Benoit Schillings discussing and displaying CCD imaging. Open board meeting 6:30 pm.
- **13** Astronomy class at Houge Park, 8 pm. Deep-sky observing with Mark Wagner.
- **19** Houge Park star party. Sunset 8:31 pm, 21% moon rises 3:15 am.
- **20** Star parties at Fremont Peak, Coe. Sunset 8:29 pm,12% moonrise 3:57 am.
- **26-27** SJAA weekend at Yosemite National Park.
- **27** Star party at Fremont Peak. Sunset 8:29 pm, 18% moonset 11:13 pm.

## JULY

- **3** Houge park star party. Sunset 8:32 pm, 72% moon sets 2:26 am.
- **11** General Meeting at Houge Park, 8 pm. Open board meeting 6:30 pm.
- **17** Houge park star party. Sunset 8:27 pm, 42% moonrise 1:56 am.
- **18** Beginning Astronomy class. John Gleason on Astrophotography at Houge Park, 8 pm. Don't miss it!
- **18** Star party at Fremont Peak. Sunset 8:23 pm, 23% moonrise 2:39 am.
- **25** Star party at Fremont Peak, Coe. Sunset 8:20 pm, 7% moonset 9:47 pm.
- **31** Houge park star party. Sunset 8:25 pm, 85% moonset 3:53 am.

*Please note that SJAA insurance only covers SJAA members at SJAA sponsored events.*

24 hour News and Information:
**SJAA Hotline**: (408) 559-1221
**Web Address**: http://www.seds.org/billa/sjaa/sjaa.html

---

## TRUE FACTS ABOUT FREMONT PEAK

### The Editor

We were able to get Ranger Mike on the phone and get the lowdown straight from the source about the situation at Fremont Peak/SJAA/FPOA.

Mike has a very nice phone voice, and seems genuinely concerned to promote and support astronomy at the Peak. It was a pleasure to talk with him.

As you may have heard, the gate to the area behind the Ranger's house will be locked, and the combination available to FPOA members only. This does not mean access is denied to non-FPOA members; it means only FPOA members may drive and park up there.

If, for example, an SJAA member who is not an FPOA member wants to set up a telescope there, that's fine as long as the car is not used to transport it. Technically, an FPOA member should be allowed to drive up if you have a buddy, but this kind of hairsplitting is not in the spirit of the thing: if you want to use the area, you really should join the FPOA.

The Astronomy Fee will continue to be $3 per vehicle (whether you're an FPOA member or not, whether you're parking at Coulter, Southwest or in the Observatory Area). There will be no picayune restrictions on this: if you fall asleep in your car, or stay a bit beyond the 12 hours on long winter nights, there will be no problem. Mike does ask if you're going to set up bed-

*See* **Fremont Peak**, p. 3

---

COPYRIGHT ©1998 SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION, INC.

=== PAGE 2 ===
# Dobson, from p. 1

He further pointed out that a 3/4" thick ground board will generally not be sufficient for larger telescopes. (Of course, I use 3/4" ground boards.)

And equally as critical is that you build the tube large enough to sleep in when weather is inclement You can't roll out of bed.... (I cannot quite get into my telescope tube.)

Public astronomy is his bread and butter. He talked about putting on programs at Death Valley, the Grand Canyon, Crater Lake, and basically all over the world. He has appeared on the Tonight Show (twice at least) and proselytized *Seeing The Universe* just about everywhere *\*in\** the universe.

A big part of it, he feels, is understanding something about what you're seeing. And that led him into section three: Cosmology.

He is not a big fan of the Big Bang, thinking there are too many holes and "fudge factors" in the model. He ironically says he predicted 15 years ago that it would not last another 10 years, and insists on sticking to the same schedule.

He raced through a "Brief History Of Cosmology" at a breakneck pace - pausing at some points to clarify - while breezing through some other points as if they were self-evident (when they really weren't). As a scientific presentation, it will hardly pass any test of rigor, but as an introductory primer it was easily digested and full of factual information (*caveat emptor* as to his conclusions).

He punctuated his explanations with some great quotes, such as Hawking's comment on superstring theory: "Astrology has a lot more going for it."

And his illustration of quantum tunneling was as elegant as any I've ever heard. "An electron simply ceases

to exist in one place, and appears in another. It's like money in the bank: when it's transferred from Santa Barbara to San Francisco, no paper goes anywhere. It simply ceases to exist in the computer in Santa Barbara, and appears in the computer in San Francisco."

He personally favors a variation of Hoyle's Steady State Universe "with a governor on it," and offered other controversial views: photons do not exist - there are merely emission and absorption events, etc. If you wanted to hear the details, you should have been there....

An astronomy club meeting hardly allows the latitude to establish the bona fides of his views, so we may simply register them as a statement of opinion with which the average cosmologist probably disagrees. (Timothy Ferris' *The Whole Shebang* offers a readable counterpoint for those who wish to "do their homework" on the subject.)

He wrapped up the presentation with a philosophical commentary on what all this means to him - that inertia implies a tendency toward changelessness, that the structure of the universe as he sees it imply an infinite, and other observations.

Perhaps some people think this kind of speculation unwarranted or inappropriate in the astronomical setting, and perhaps they are right.

But there was no doubt at the end of the meeting that we had heard was what John Dobson had to say about telescopes, astronomy, cosmology and philosophy. In that sense, he delivered 100%; he gave it all he had, for hours on end - with stamina, fortitude, dedication, thoughtfulness and commitment - after having risen at five in the morning to make sure he was able to make the trip to the meet-

ing from a monastery in the Sierras.

Agree or disagree, whether we find him outrageous or amusing or right, there is no doubt we owe him a resounding thanks for coming down and letting us get to know him first hand, and get a feel for the ideas and motives of a true revolutionary in amateur astronomy.

Thanks for dropping by, John. Come back any time. We'll keep a scope warm for you (and toss a blanket in....)

## THE SHALLOW SKY

### Akkana Peck

Mercury (which reaches superior conjunction on June 10) and Mars are too close to the Sun to be easily visible in June.

**Gibbous Venus rises during morning twilight.**

**Jupiter** returns to late-night observers this month. By the end of June, it rises at about midnight. Telescope viewers might notice that the western edge of Jupiter is in shadow - the planet is slightly gibbous. On the morning of June 17 the Moon will be less than a degree away from Jupiter; an occultation will be visible from parts of South America and Antarctica.

**Saturn** is visible in the morning sky; by the end of June, it will rise around 2am. The ring tilt, currently fifteen degrees, is becoming more favorable for earthbound observers.

**Uranus** and **Neptune** are in Capricornus and are nearing opposition; they're visible all night but are highest in the sky during the morning hours.

**Pluto** sits near the border of Ophiuchus and Scorpius, where identifying the magnitude 13.7 planet will be a challenge for the patient star hopper.

---

SJAA EPHEMERIS PAGE 2 JUNE 1998

=== PAGE 3 ===
# Fremont Peak, from p. 1

ding a tent or such) or use a campsite, or stay for a few days, please pay the $7/day camping fee. But for the nighttime astronomical uses most of us indulge, the fee is the usual $3 — just as if it were day use.

Mike indicated he'll get an approval for all this, and have the policy in writing sometime soon; but things have been pretty hectic up there all year, and it just hasn't gotten done yet.

The eventual written policy is expected to reflect the above statements, to the extent I have reported them correctly (and I sure hope I did; Mike was very clear about what he was saying, and any error is completely my fault).

There are no restrictions on what nights the area may be used, but of course it is on us to behave ourselves and show reasonable courtesy.

There has also been talk about incidents involving groups of unruly people (not astronomers) in the park at night. Mike is concerned about this, and wants to nip it in the bud (perhaps things got a little lax "between administrations" while Rick wasn't there). With this in mind, he would like it if anyone who sees visitors getting out of line would let him know, ideally by dialing 911 at the pay phone at the first lot.

Further, there is discussion of putting a locked gate at Doc Flat with a combination that *all* astronomers would have (published over SJAA/ FPOA/TAC etc.). OF course, casual scofflaws would not normally access those sources, and it may well put an end to the unfortunate interruptions that so irritate both astronomers and campers. However, this is nothing but a discussion at this point, and Mike would very much be interested in hearing about any ideas anyone in the astronomy community might have to help ensure payment by visitors and

keep the levels of noise, trouble and graffiti down.

And of course, pay your fees when you go up there.

## **LUNACY**

### David North

Well, we all survived the Great Introduction To Moon Observing, but it was a close thing. The speaker acknowledged the program was too long, and will cut it down and make further adjustments for the next time. We had a lot of fun making the Amazing Sparkle 3-D Moon Map, and it seems to have worked okay.

The June Moon actually started in May, and it's over six days old when June begins (first quarter Moon is actually on June 1!). This means you'll want to be observing, well, just about as soon as you get done reading this. It's still fairly high in the sky during first quarter, though this is the month for viewing the new Moon at it's best (which means put the 23rd and 24th on your calendar for making early attempts at seeing the Moon... which, as a bonus, the visible limb will be heavily librated toward us with maximum happening at the two day Moon).

This is the first in a series of full Moons you don't want to miss. On the 12th (two days after full) there is a moderate libration of the western limb; but full around sunset on the 9th. This is unfortunate in that the terminator will be moving over to the Crisium side, but you may catch some good looks at the Orientale area early in the evening. It's also worth a glance on the 8th just to see how close you're getting. A strong southern libration will be fading a bit at this time; it starts just before full. This will be another opportunity to hunt the southern craters near full Moon.

The best northern libration is happening around new Moon, so it's not a matter of concern.

For Sinus Iridum watchers, this should be one of those months where it first presents itself hanging off into the "dark side," an amazing sight if you haven't seen it, and an amazing sight if you have — an iridescent crescent suspended against an infinite ebony made darker by the contrast.

As the month drifts away, a new lunation will start, so we'll be just past first quarter yet again when July comes along — and there will be a good Moon on the Fourth of July (a joy for some, a tragedy for others...).

## **THE CELESTIAL TOURIST SPEAKS - ON APOLLO**

### Jay Freeman

Twelve human beings — the Lunar Module crews of Apollo's 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, and 17 — have walked on the Moon. (One of the crew of each Apollo stayed in the Command Module while the Lunar Module descended.)

The last Moon-walker to leave was Apollo 17 commander Eugene Cernan. Three other Apollo's — 8, 10, and 13 — also traveled to the vicinity of the Moon, thus there have been a total of twentyseven "seats" — chances for a human to make the voyage. (Apollo's 8 and 10 were test missions not intended to land; Apollo 13 suffered an explosion on board and barely made it home.) But only twenty-four have done so. That is because three humans made the voyage twice — they were James Lovell, Eugene Cernan, and John Young.

No one has made more than one lunar landing.

Another six Apollo's flew with crew on board: Apollo's 7 and 9 were test flights in Earth orbit, three Apollo's carried crews to the US Skylab space station, and one more docked with a Soviet Soyuz in Earth orbit in the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project.

---

SJAA EPHEMERIS PAGE 3 JUNE 1998

=== PAGE 4 ===
# EDITOR'S EXTRAS

John Dobson's talk on the night of May 9 was just the continuation of a hectic day for all of us who were trying to coordinate the event (basically myself, Akkana Peck driving escort, Ed Erbeck setting up an introduction, and most important, Jane Houston — the charming and tireless SFSA dervish who volunteered to bring him down).

His departure from the Sierras was delayed, and all the schedules got out of whack. We were to meet for dinner before the board meeting, but what with getting back to the bay area, getting a mirror to the aluminizer (THE critical event of the day, of course, from John's point of view) and getting down to San Jose, things were late. When Jane got to my house they were both a little beat from racing around and in desperate need of facilities. Fortunately, the plumbing was working.

While waiting, we learned the first important thing about John Dobson: he plays piano with a firm and methodical hand. This is no coincidence: pretty much the way he does everything.

Then it was out to the car in a flash, a short drive, and we finally got to dinner just about the time the board meeting was to begin, so I had to miss it. Oh well.

We had a short but social dinner at the Hickory Pit, which turned out to be a perfect choice for John — his favored meal is eggs (once over easy), hash browns (rare), and "something green," preferably avocado. Watching him order was not unlike watching James Bond order a drink, if Bond had been a bit more sly and easygoing.

The staff entered thralldom immediately, and came through like champs, with a peeled and sliced avocado. No doubt they will one day have a "John Dobson Ate Here And Liked It A Lot" plaque.

Health food tips: if they don't have extra butter to put on your hash browns, you can supplement your diet with the little half & half containers they supply for coffee. If you're lucky, they'll keep bringing them.

And if your chocolate bar isn't quite enough to satisfy, try buttering it. This last he confessed while I had my mouth full (I'm sure he timed it this way), and only luck prevented a plosive burst of semichewed food from pelting the table... so here's another tip: it's perilous to take big bites when eating with John.

He is full of subterfuge, and takes advantage of his age (82). He will pretend to not hear things when it helps ruin the timing of a smart remark (from someone else, of course) but somehow can sense the slightest provocation for a story no matter how quietly uttered (he has a million stories, all of them good).

He can suddenly forget what he was talking about as a convenient segue to what he really wants to talk about. He can even become mechanically incompetent when it serves him ("how do you work this focuser?" when confronted with a Crayford design...) to point out his own preference (a simple drawtube).

He's frugal, resourceful, innovative, cunning, persistent, opinionated, a consummate public speaker, and a tireless competitor (he managed to outsit practically the entire club at the meeting).

Whether you agree with him or not, be glad he's on your side.

# ACTIVITIES THROUGH OTHER CLUBS

TAC has reserved the Montebello site for every Wednesday, more or less indefinitely (weather permitting). It's a good idea to check TAC's web-page at http://www.rahul.net/resource/TAC/ (mailing list archives) before going. There must be a permit holder present to use the facility. To get there, take Page Mill Road off 280 (or get to it via El Monte Road) until you're near the top. Montebello's sign will be visible on the left.

First quarter Friday star parties have become a "mobile" event, and checking their web page (http://www.rahul.net/resource/TAC/) is the best way to get times. Third quarter Friday star parties arise at Van Meter school when the skies cooperate.

PAS opens Foothill Observatory for public viewing every clear Friday evening from 8:30 p.m. until 11:00 p.m. PAS operates a 16-inch reflector and a 6-inch refractor. Solar viewing is also held every clear Saturday morning from 10:00 a.m. until noon with a very nice filter setup. Both of these programs are outstanding, and all SJAA members are encouraged to check them out.

## June

12 PAS General Meeting "Apollo 13 Accident" with Owen Brown. 7:30 pm at Foothill College Forum Building, Room F-1.

17 PAS Board Meeting 7:30 pm Foothill College Observatory

20 Oakridge prime observing night. PAS has a private observing site for members only; combination required.

## July

10 PAS General Meeting "Instruments Night" 7:30 pm at Foothill College

15 PAS Board Meeting 7:30 pm Foothill College Observatory

---

SJAA EPHEMERIS | PAGE 4 | JUNE 1998

=== PAGE 5 ===
# COMET COMMENTS

## Don Machholz

The SOHO satellite as found two more comets, one of which should be visible in the evening sky, with Southern Hemisphere observers favored. Positions are given below.

**Patrick Stonehouse** of Wolverine, Michigan discovered a comet on April 22, his first comet find. He used a 17.5", f/4.5 reflector at 62x. C/1998 H1 (Stonehouse) is in a highly-inclined orbit and remains in the Northern sky.

**COMET HUNTING NOTES**: Patrick Stonehouse does not systematically sweep the sky for comets, but does so only occasionally at the end of some of his observing sessions. I suspect there are numerous other amateurs who conduct comet hunting on a casual basis. For Stonehouse the search lasted about 100 hours over 20+ years.

### Ephemerides (for 00 UT)

#### C/1997 J2 (Meunier-Dupouy)

| Date | R.A. 2000) | Dec | El | Sky Mag |
|------|------------|-----|-------|---------|
| 06-01 | 22h30.8m | +29°55' | 80° | M 11.5 |
| 06-06 | 22h31.0m | +29°37' | 84° | M 11.5 |
| 06-11 | 22h30.6m | +29°15' | 88° | M 11.5 |
| 06-16 | 22h29.7m | +28°49' | 92° | M 11.4 |
| 06-21 | 22h28.2m | +28°18' | 97° | M 11.4 |
| 06-26 | 22h26.1m | +27°41' | 101° | M 11.5 |
| 07-01 | 22h23.4m | +26°58' | 106° | M 11.4 |
| 07-06 | 22h20.2m | +26°08' | 111° | M 11.3 |
| 07-11 | 22h16.5m | +25°09' | 116° | M 11.3 |

#### C/1995 O1 (Hale-Bopp)

| Date | R.A. (2000) Dec | | El. | Sky Mag. |
|------|-----------------|---|-----|----------|
| 06-01 | 05h51.5m | -49°39' | 74° | E 10.1 |
| 06-06 | 05h56.5m | -49°42' | 74° | E 10.2 |
| 06-11 | 06h01.4m | -49°48' | 74° | E 10.2 |
| 06-16 | 06h06.4m | -49°58' | 74° | E 10.3 |
| 06-21 | 06h11.4m | -50°10' | 74° | E 10.3 |
| 06-26 | 06h16.4m | -50°26' | 74° | E 10.4 |
| 07-01 | 06h21.4m | -50°44' | 74° | M 10.4 |
| 07-06 | 06h26.3m | -51°06' | 74° | M 10.5 |
| 07-11 | 06h31.2m | -51°30' | 74° | M 10.5 |

#### C/1998 H1 (Stonehouse)

| Date | R.A. (2000) Dec | | El | Sky Mag |
|------|-----------------|---|-------|---------|
| 06-01 | 12h39.7m | +49°06' | 92° | E 12.6 |
| 06-04 | 12h33.8m | +49°34' | 89° | E 12.7 |
| 06-07 | 12h28.8m | +49°22' | 86° | E 12.9 |
| 06-10 | 12h24.7m | +50°11' | 83° | E 13.1 |
| 06-13 | 12h21.3m | +50°23' | 81° | E 13.2 |
| 06-16 | 12h18.7m | +50°32' | 79° | E 13.4 |

#### C/1998 J1 (SOHO)

| Date | R.A. (2000) Dec | | El | Sky Mag |
|------|-----------------|---|-------|---------|
| 06-01 | 06h37.4m | -13°47' | 47° | E 5.5 |
| 06-04 | 06h53.6m | -17°53' | 51° | E 6.0 |
| 06-07 | 07h08.9m | -21°30' | 54° | E 6.5 |
| 06-10 | 07h23.4m | -24°41' | 57° | E 6.9 |
| 06-13 | 07h37.2m | -27°30' | 60° | E 7.3 |
| 06-16 | 07h50.4m | -29°59' | 62° | E 7.6 |

| Object: | Hale-Bopp | Meunier-Dupouy | Stonehouse | SOHO |
|---------|-----------|----------------|------------|------|
| Peri. Date: | 1997 04 01.1347 | 1998 03 10.4365 | 1998 04 14.2051998 05 08.837 | |
| Peri. Dist (AU): | 0.914008 | 3.051015 | 1.48678 | 0.16264 |
| Arg/Peri (2000): | 130.5787 deg. | 122.6755 deg. | 001.146 deg. | 110.666 deg. |
| Asc. Node (2000): | 282.4653 deg. | 148.8429 deg. | 222.103 deg. | 349.963 deg. |
| Incl (2000): | 089.4268 deg. | 091.2731 deg. | 104.668 deg. | 58.089 deg. |
| Eccen: | 0.995085 | 1.000760 | 1.0 | 1.0 |
| Orbital Period: | ~2500 years | Long Period | Long Period? | Long Period |
| Ref: | MPC 30738 | MPC 30738 | IAUC 6887 | MPEC 1998-J14 |
| Epoch: | 1997 12 18 | 1998 03 08 | 1998 04 14 | 1998 05 09 |
| Absol. Mag/"n": | -1.0/4.0 | 4.0/4.0 | 10.0/4.0 | 7.0/4.0 |

---

# CELESTIAL CALENDAR JUNE 1998

## Richard Stanton

### (all times PDT)

**Lunar Phases**

| Phase | Time | Date | Rise | Trans | Set |
|-------|------|------|------|-------|-----|
| NM | 16:52 | 01 | 06:23 | 13:00 | 19:31 |
| FQ | 18:31 | 09 | 13:44 | 19:00 | 00:31 |
| FM | 11:50 | 16 | 19:25 | 00:38 | 06:39 |
| LQ | 06:35 | 23 | 23:50 | 07:02 | 14:13 |

**Mercury** 1.28 A.U. Mag. 1.9

| Date | Rise | Trans | Set | R.A. | Dec. |
|------|------|-------|-----|------|------|
| 07 | 05:30 | 12:53 | 20:17 | 04:44.6 | +22:39 |
| 17 | 06:17 | 13:49 | 21:21 | 06:19.4 | +25:03 |
| 27 | 07:09 | 14:33 | 21:56 | 07:43.9 | +23:12 |

**Venus** 1.28 A.U. Mag. 4.3

| Date | Rise | Trans | Set | R.A. | Dec. |
|------|------|-------|-----|------|------|
| 07 | 03:52 | 10:38 | 17:24 | 02:31.9 | +12:48 |
| 17 | 03:47 | 10:45 | 17:43 | 03:18.2 | +16:19 |
| 27 | 03:46 | 10:54 | 18:02 | 04:06.4 | +19:14 |

**Mars** 2.51 A.U. Mag. 11.4

| Date | Rise | Trans | Set | R.A. | Dec. |
|------|------|-------|-----|------|------|
| 07 | 05:20 | 12:38 | 19:58 | 04:33.3 | +22:15 |
| 17 | 05:06 | 12:29 | 19:52 | 05:03.2 | +23:12 |
| 27 | 04:54 | 12:19 | 19:45 | 05:33.1 | +23:48 |

**Jupiter** 4.89 A.U. Mag. -2.5

| Date | Rise | Trans | Set | R.A. | Dec. |
|------|------|-------|-----|------|------|
| 07 | 01:56 | 07:50 | 13:44 | 23:45.4 | -02:50 |
| 17 | 01:19 | 07:15 | 13:10 | 23:49.4 | -02:27 |
| 27 | 00:42 | 06:38 | 12:35 | 23:52.4 | -02:11 |

**Saturn** 9.86 A.U. Mag. 10.9

| Date | Rise | Trans | Set | R.A. | Dec. |
|------|------|-------|-----|------|------|
| 07 | 03:26 | 09:59 | 16:31 | 01:54.3 | 109.14 |
| 17 | 02:50 | 09:23 | 15:56 | 01:58.0 | +09:33 |
| 27 | 02:13 | 08:47 | 15:21 | 02:01.2 | +09:48 |

**SOL Star Type G2V Intelligent Life in System?**

*(HOD = Hours of Darkness)*

| HOD Dt | Rise | Trans | Set | R.A. | Dec. |
|--------|------|-------|-----|------|------|
| 05:29 07 | 05:44 | 13:06 | 20:30 | 05:00.8 | +22:44 |
| 05:21 17 | 05:43 | 13:09 | 20:34 | 05:42.2 | +23:22 |
| 05:22 27 | 05:46 | 13:11 | 20:36 | 06:23.8 | +23:19 |

**Astronomical Twilight**

| | JD 2,450 | 971 07 | Begin | End |
|---|----------|--------|-------|-----|
| | | | 03:51 | 22:22 |
| | | 981 17 | 03:49 | 22:28 |
| | | 991 27 | 03:52 | 22:30 |

**Siderealtime**

| Transit Right | 07 | 00:00 | 15:54 |
|---------------|-------|-------|-------|
| Ascension at | 17 | 00:00 | 16:33 |
| Local Midnit | 27 | 00:00 | 17:13 |

**Darkest Saturday Night** 20-Jun-98

| Sunset | 20:35 |
|--------|-------|
| Twilight End | 22:29 |
| Moon Rise | 03:13 |
| Dawn Begin | 03:49 |
| Hours Dark | 05:20 |

---

[Star symbol graphic]

DonM353259@aol.com.

Web Page: http://members.aol.com/cometcom/index.html

CC234XT 01-07-98 Don Machholz (530) 346-8963

---

SJAA EPHEMERIS | PAGE 5 | JUNE 1998

---

**••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••**

=== PAGE 6 ===
# May Board Meeting Notes

**Bill Arnett**

The May meeting of the SJAA board of directors was held at Houge Park on 1998 Mar 14. The meeting was called to order at 6:45pm by president Ed Erbeck. Dave North, Terry Kahl and Bob Elsberty were absent (though Dave and Bob showed up later).

The board's first official act was to vote a big thank you to Mark Wagner for the excellent cookies!

Several of us had had brief discussions with Ranger Dooley at Pacheco State Park about the possibility of building an observatory there. The board felt that this is generally a good idea and we would possibly be interested in making it happen. But there is too little real information at this time to take any definitive action. Mark Wagner agreed to speak to Ranger Dooley again to see what he specifically had in mind.

There was a discussion some time ago between some SJAA directors and some FPOA folks about the possibility of housing the SJAA's C11 at Fremont Peak. Again, the board likes the idea but no specific action is yet possible. There was some discussion that if we do this that we need to make sure SJAA members have access to it. And we agreed to make it clear that this is NOT in any way to be construed as a quid pro quo for our gift to help repair the FPO. If there is any quid pro quo it will be that we agree to operate the C11 for public viewing during public nights at FPO. Ed will follow up with FPOA.

There was some discussion of canceling the 3rd quarter public events at Houge Park and/or combining them with PAC events at Van Meter school. But the board felt that it was best to leave things as they are for now.

Mike Koop reported that a 6" Newtonian with a pipe mount was donated to the club. Paul Barton built a Dob mount for it. It is now ready for inclusion in the loaner program. The pipe mount will be sold.

Mike also reports that the loaner program is running smoothly. An inventory of all the various hardware will be prepared.

The board agreed to move the start of next year's swap meet from noon to 1pm to allow time for people to get lunch and to avoid a lengthy slow period before the auction (at 4).

The board voted unanimously to pay our yearly Astronomical League dues ($610).

Bob Elsberty gave a brief financial report. No surprises.

The minutes of the March meeting were approved. The board agreed that preliminary minutes as written by Bill Arnett may be published in the *Ephemeris* should the editor so desire. They will NOT be the official minutes (though they will almost certainly be essentially identical).

Bob reported that he had a call from a person who had attended one of our Houge star parties and was not happy with his experience. It seems that he got the cold shoulder and felt very much out of place. This came as a big surprise to all of us. We must all try hard to make sure this doesn't happen again. There were several suggestions but no specific action was taken. The board will be discussing this issue again next month. Until

then, we should all watch out and try to make sure everyone at our events feels welcome.

Jack Zeiders suggested that we start a campaign to rebuild the observatory fund. And he made the first donation toward that end. Unfortunately, we were completely out of time at that point. We will discuss it again next month.

The meeting adjourned at 7:53.

---

## To Subscribe to/Unsubscribe from the SJAA Mailing List send mail to

**sjaa-request@seds.org**

with a blank subject line followed by a single text line that says "subscribe" or "unsubscribe"

---

# PERIODICAL PUBLICATION STATEMENT

*SJAA Ephemeris*, newsletter of the **San Jose Astronomical Association**, is published monthly, 12 times a year, January through December.

San Jose Astronomical Association
5380 Pebbletree Way
San Jose, California 95111-1846

---

# SUBMIT

Members are encouraged to submit articles for publication in the *SJAA Ephemeris*. Send articles to Dave North via e-mail to **Timocharis@aol.com**. Articles received by the tenth will be put in the following month's newsletter. Please include your name and phone number.

---

SJAA EPHEMERIS | PAGE 6 | JUNE 1998

=== PAGE 7 ===
# Officers and Board of Directors

**Pres** Ed Erbeck 379-5413  
**VP** David North 297-5257  
**Sec** Jim Van Nuland 371-1307  
**Tres** Bob Elsberry 226-4483  
**Dir** Bill Arnett 947-8721  
**Dir** Terry Kahl 629-0563  
**Dir** Mike Koop 446-0310  
**Dir** Bill O'Shaughnessy 984-3985  
**Dir** Mark Taylor 737-9135

## Ephemeris Staff

**Editor** David North 297-5257  
**Circulation** Bob Brauer 292-7695  
Lew Kurtz 739-7106  
**Layout** Mrs. Crazy Ed  
**Proofing** Bill Arnett

## Mentoring Program Chairman

Ed Erbeck 379-5413

## Activities Committee

Bill O'Shaughnessy 984-3985  
Dave Smith 978-5503

## Observational Astronomy Teacher

Jack Zeiders 281-0220

## Observatory Committee

Bob Brauer 292-7695  
David North 297-5257

## School Star Party Chairman

Jim Van Nuland 371-1307

## Telescope Loaner Program

Mike Koop 446-0310

## Web Page

Bill Arnett billa@znet.com

★ ★ ★

---

# TELESCOPE LOAN PROGRAM STATUS
## Mike Koop

### Current Scope Loans

These are scopes that have been recently loaned out. If you are interested in borrowing one of these scopes, you will be placed on the waiting list till the scope becomes available after the due date.

| No. | Scope Description | Borrower | Due Date |
|-----|------------------|----------|----------|
| 6 | 8" Celestron S/C | Ravi Tembhekar | 7/26/98 |
| 8 | 14" Dobson | Ralph Seguin | 6/23/98 |
| 15 | 8" Dobson | David Kingsley | 6/14/98 |
| 21 | 10" Dobson | Ann Hastings | 7/3/98 |
| 23 | 6" Newt/P Mount | Alexander Koczur | 6/14/98 |
| 24 | 60mm Refractor | Marlene Nylander | 7/17/98 |
| 27 | 13" Dobson | Jeff Crilly | 6/28/98 |
| 28 | 13" Dobson | Mark Stallons | 8/3/98 |
| 29 | C8, Astrophotography | Michael Ladae | 7/17/98 |

### Extended Scope Loans

These are scopes that have had their loan period extended. If you are interested in borrowing one of these scopes, we will contact the current borrower and try to work out a reasonable transfer time for both parties.

| No. | Scope Description | Borrower | Due Date |
|-----|------------------|----------|----------|
| 1 | 4.5" Newt/P Mount | Mark Cousins | 5/24/98 |
| 2 | 6" f9 Dob | John Paul De Silva | ? |
| 4 | 60mm Refractor | Del Johnson | Indefinite |
| 7 | 12.5" Dobson | Nick Tucci | 6/11/98 |
| 9 | C-11 Compustar | Paul Barton | Indefinite |
| 16 | Solar Scope | Mike Koop | 6/13/98 |
| 18 | 8" Newt/P Mount | Cecelia Yarnell | 4/18/98 |

### Available Scopes

These are scopes that are available for immediate loan, stored at other SJAA members homes. If you are interested in borrowing one of these scopes, please contact Mike Koop by email or at (408) 473-6315 for a scope pick up and up at any of the listed SJAA events.

| No. | Scope Description | Stored At: |
|-----|------------------|------------|
| 3 | 4" Quantum S/C | Lew Kurtz |
| 19 | 6" Newt/P Mount | Marlene Nylander |
| 26 | 11" Dobson | David Manley |
| 30 | 7" f/9 Newt/Pipe Mount | David Manley |
| 31 | 8" Dobson | Paul Barton 1 |

### Waiting List

| No. | Scope Description | Standby |
|-----|------------------|---------|
| 29 | C8, Astrophotography | Alexander Koczur |
| 16 | Solar Scope | Nick Tucci |

### Notes:

Doug Pena of San Jose has donated a 8"/f8 Reflector to the Loaner Program. Paul Barton has "Dobsonized" it for easy beginner use. It comes complete with a 6x25 Right Angle Finder and a Copperhead Gunsite (Red Dot) finder. Be the first to check out this new addition to the Scope Loaner Program. Thank you, Doug and Paul.

Do you have some space to store a scope or two? Please E-mail Mike Koop, koopm@best.com. Thanks

All scopes are available to any SJAA member. To reserve a scope, please contact Mike Koop at (408) 473-6315.

---

SJAA EPHEMERIS  
PAGE 7  
JUNE 1998

=== PAGE 8 ===
# San Jose Astronomical Association Membership Form

New ___ Renewal ___  
Membership - $15 ___  
Junior (younger than 18 years old) - $6 ___  
Sky and Telescope - add $27 to membership ___  
(Sky & Tel will not accept multiyear subscriptions)

Make checks payable to "SJAA"

Bring this form to any SJAA Meeting or send (along with your check) to Bob Elsberry, Treasurer San Jose Astronomical Association, 5380 Pebbletree Way San Jose, CA 95111-1846 Telephone: (408) 226-4483

Name: _______________________________________________________________

Address: _______________________________________________________________

_______________________________________________________________

Phone: _______________________________________________________________

e-mail address: _______________________________________________________________

---

**SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION  
5380 PEBBLETREE WAY  
SAN JOSE, CA 95111-1846**

**NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION**

**U.S. POSTAGE PAID**

**PERMIT NO. 5381**

**SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA**