<html><head><title>Ephemeris</TITLE></HEAD><body>

<table border=1 width=100%><tr><td valign=top align=center width=79>
<a href="../eph.html" webstripperlinkwas="../eph.html"><img border=0 src="../img/icon.gif" webstripperlinkwas="../img/icon.gif" height=32 width=79></a><br>
<br><font size=-1><a href="../sjaa.html" webstripperlinkwas="../sjaa.html">SJAA</a><br>
<br><a href="../eph.html" webstripperlinkwas="../eph.html">Ephemeris</a></font>
</td><td align=center>
<h1 align=center>Board Meeting Notes</H1>
</td></tr></table>
<br clear=all>


<h2>June</h2>
There was no board meeting in June.

<h2>July</h2>
<p>
	The meeting was called to order 6:40 pm at Houge Park. All directors were present (eventually) except Bill O (who was excused). 
<p>
	Much was discussed, little actual action taken. 
<p>
	The only formal action was to approve sending our $10 fee to the State; unsurprisingly, that motion carries without dissent. 
<p>
	We discussed some possibilities with respect to the distribution of the Ephemeris. The current bulk mail arrangement is awkward and slow. It appears that if we can get below 200 copies printed and mailed that we can save a little money even if we mail first class. (Editor's note: only as long as we constrain it to eight pages, if my scale is correct). This may be possible if enough people elect to read it electronically. Dave North will investigate further. 
<p>
	The board also agreed with Dave's suggestion that we establish a fund for the purpose of acquiring some new and better equipment for the loaner program. Many ideas were kicked around. 
<p>
	Dave, Bill, Ed and Bob agreed to form a more detailed proposal. 
<p>
	Someone noticed that the Ephemeris (and the Web site) mention an Activities Committee comprised of Dave Smith and Bill O. As it seems to be completely inactive, we all agreed to disband this committee. But then we agreed with Jim that perhaps we should give Dave and Bill a chance to speak before any action is taken. 
<p>
	Dave North suggested a business card that will help recruiting new members, that would have the hot line number and the URL for the club. Jack Zeiders offered to pay for the first batch if he also had design approval. Accepted by acclimation. 
<p>
	Jack Zeiders donated a slide projector. ($155.44) 
<p>
	Ed reported that the idea of moving our C11 to Fremont Peak is going well. More details remained to be worked out be all agree in principle that it is a good idea. Ed will attend the next FPOA board meeting to move this along.
<p>
<h2>August</h2>
 
	The meeting was called to order 6:47pm at Houge Park.  All directors 
were present (eventually). 
<p>
 	The schedule of upcoming events was briefly discussed and approved 
without dissent. 
<p>
 	The minutes of the previous meeting as sent by email were approved 
without dissent. 
<p>
 	Not much has happened with respect to electronic delivery of the 
Ephemeris.  Dave North will send a note to the SJAA mailing list. Hopefully, this will generate more response. 
<p>
 	The 1999 calendar was discussed and a few changes made.  The only  real issue is the beginning astronomy class for which there is no teacher for next year.  We decided to include it in the calendar anyway.  
<p>
	Rich Neushaeffer had commented by email that there are some newly 
planted trees near the observing area at Houge Park.  But we weren't 
sure exactly which trees he was referring to.  There appear to be new 
ones at the north end of the area but they don't appear to be even 
potentially difficult.  The ones at the south end will require some 
more scrutiny. 
<p>
 	We agreed that the newly created acquisition fund should look into getting: 
a computerized scope (preferably an LX200), 
a truss tube Dob, 
a CCD setup, and 
a large refractor. 
 
<p>
	It was also noted that the existing loaner scopes will need some money to bring them up to their full potential.  It was also suggested that 
we might start an "adopt a scope" program for more experienced members 
to take care of the loaner scopes.  Mike will report on their detailed 
status as soon as possible. 
<p>
 	A motion was made to authorize Mark Taylor to go ahead with the 
Astronomical Pocket Diary project based on the information which had 
been discussed previously via email.  Much heated discussion ensued 
after Bill Arnett noticed that there were some non-astronomical entries in the calendar.  Mark agreed to ask the APD publisher to remove them but we are not yet sure that it's possible or if it can be done without 
adversely affecting the production cost.  If the price is not significantly affected the anniversary items will be ordered removed; otherwise, we will simply order them with the standard format.  Eight directors voted "Yes" anyway; Bill O'Shaughnessy voted "No" (because of the non-astro 
entries). 
<p>
	The motion to adjourn passed unanimously at 7:30.
<p>

<hr size=6>
<table width=100%><tr>
<td align=left><a href="http://www.sjaa.net/arnett.html">Bill Arnett</a>; last updated:
1998 Aug 11
</td>
<td align=right><a href="9809k.html" webstripperlinkwas="9809k.html">Prev</a>
<a href="9809ccom.html" webstripperlinkwas="9809ccom.html">Next</a></td>
</tr></table>
</BODY></HTML>
