=== PAGE 1 ===
# SAN JOSE
# ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION **SJAA**
# EPHEMERIS

## SEPTEMBER 1984

## FROM THE EDITORS DESK
BY: JOHN GLEASON

The July 27/28 star party at Glacier Point was a success. 10 members of the SJAA were present at the point both nights. I would like to thank Brian Deis for the fine astronomy talk and slide show he presented on Friday night, and I also thank Jim Van Nuland, Paul Mancuso, Ron Walton, Dave & Mary Ambrose, Robert Fingerhut, Jack Peterson, and 2 others who were there on Saturday. I did not get their names. Plus myself and my wife - all enjoyed fine weather and dark skies at what has to be one of the better observing sites to date.

A number of park visitors were treated to their first telescopic view of the planets and deep sky wonders. Most of the crowd disappeared around midnight, leaving an opportunity for observing. The SJAA was also at Marriott's Great America on August 4th. This was another fine opportunity to introduce a star party at Marriott's - treating a lot of people to their first telescope views.

In case you haven't heard yet, the University of Santa Clara is looking for a sponsor to help restore the 16" Alvan Clark refractor off their hands. If you recall, a few years ago the SJAA pledged to plead with the University to operate the observatory facility and maintain the telescope. The proposal was turned down. Later it was learned that the telescope was to be given away to a museum. Fortunately the museum has no interest in the telescope, and now the University is looking for a group or individuals who will take the telescope and use it for astronomy. The only problem is that the SJAA does not have a site nor the funds to take on such a project. Enter the "Friends of Grant Ranch".

The "Friends of Grant Ranch" is an organization of individuals who provide funds for improvements to the park. As you know, the SJAA has been using the park as a "close in" observing site. Several of the people at Grant Ranch have expressed an interest in building a permanent observatory in the park. After all, they have possibilities of installing a 16" Clark refractor. There is even talk of road and building funds. Of course everything is talk now. There still needs to be an inspection of the refractor, site locations and evaluations, and if we get these - evaluations of use for the telescope, etc etc.

Another possibility for a permanent observing site has also come up, and that is at Fremont Peak State Park. After spending an evening with park ranger Rick Morales, it turned out that Rick is also interested in having a permanent observatory built at some location within the park. And that there are formal processes and guidelines that the SJAA could follow to help "make it happen". This may come true. Remember, Kevin Medlock has a 30" telescope under construction that could very well be installed at a site like this one. In fact the park could get state or national attention if turned into an "Astronomy Park".

None of this can be accomplished by a few individuals - but needs the support of all the SJAA membership. The SJAA has been striving towards establishing itself as one of the organizations in the country - Deep Sky Observing, Telescope Making, Astrophotography, Comet Hunting. We have done it all. Either of these two projects will serve to further enhance the SJAA's position in the community, expanding their outreach public interface of astronomy to enhance amateur telescopes, the capabilities of amateurs, and promoting the science of astronomy.

## DEEP SKY NOTES

SEPTEMBER 1984
BY: STEVE GOTTLIEB

On September 1783 William Herschel began his sweeps for nebulae and ushered in a new era in observational astronomy. By this time, a total of 137 nebulae and clusters had been catalogued. Of these, 40 were discovered by Messier and 28 by Mechain. In addition, during an expedition to the Cape of Good Hope in 1751, Lacaille discovered 24 southern deep sky objects, 21 of which are still listed in the NGC, Messier or IC catalogue. (due to being unresolvable from Paris)

When William Herschel completed his sweep No. 1 on Dec. 30, 1802, he had discovered nearly 2500 new nebulae and clusters, increasing the known total by 1800 per cent! His catalogue is divided on sets into 8 classes of "very bright nebulae, very faint nebulae, very planetary nebulae, very large nebulae, very compressed clusters of stars, pretty compressed clusters, and coarsely scattered clusters of stars". Herschel also introduced the notational abbreviation which is still used in Burnham's Celestial Handbook.

Between 1825 and 1833, John Hershel continued in his father's footsteps and added 500 new objects, all discovered with a 20 foot refractor with an 18 inch aperture. In 1838 John traveled to the Cape of Good Hope and discovered a full 1700 new southern deep sky objects.

The first great catalogue was the General Catalogue (GC) of nebulae and clusters of Stars (GC). This 1864 by John Herschel contained 5079 entries. During the next thirty-five years, 1000 new objects were found, many using the 72 inch reflector of the Earl of Rosse at Parsontown. In addition, as many inaccurate positions in Hershel's catalogue were found, a new comprehensive catalogue (NGC) was commissioned in 1888 by the Royal Astronomical Society to compile the New General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars (NGC), containing 7840 entries. The Index Catalogues (IC1 and IC2) added over 5000 objects discovered over the next 20 years - including most of the first photographic discoveries.

=== PAGE 2 ===
# EVENTS CALENDAR

## SEPTEMBER 1

Star party at Grant Ranch county park. (see map) This is a first quarter moon and planet party. This will be a good opportunity for members to check out this new observing site if they have not already. The park is close to the San Jose area, and the SJAA is considering this location for an observatory site.

## SEPTEMBER 8

Equipment and slide night at the Los Gatos Red Cross Building. This will be a good astronomy function allows members to show off recent astrophotos, slides of astronomical events, and telescopes. There will be telescopes set-up in the parking lot for observing. Ed note: I personally encourage members to bring and show off their equipment and astrophotos. We have a lof of members here that can benefit from a first equipment night that I attended, the rest is history. Meeting begins at 8 pm

## SEPTEMBER 15

8 P M Board meeting at the Los Gatos Red Cross building. members welcome.

## SEPTEMBER 22

Grant Ranch picnic and star party. This is a "bring your own everything" picnic. To be followed by an evening starparty. Picnic to start in the early afternoon.

## SEPTEMBER 29

Fremont Peak star party.

## OCTOBER 6

General Monthly meeting at the University of Santa Clara. This months guest speaker is Norman Sperling and will tells us about and give us answer to the "Four Great Questions of Astronomy".

## CALL FOR MEMBERSHIP RENEWALS

If you have not renewed your membership yet then PLEASE SEND your renewal form, remittance, and if you want to renew Sky and Telescope their white notice card to: Robert Fingerhut, 1040 Rio Verde Pl. #11A, San Jose. CA (408) 629-4455. THANKS. Please use the enclosed renewal form. You wouldn't want to mis another exciting issue of the Ephemeris now would you? You would?

## ASTROMART

Here are some items that should have gone into the June Ephemeris.

17 5" Coulter or C8Cel refractor in bevessegood + best offer. C100 refractor, heavy duty equatorial mount. $875. 12.5" f/5 Dobsonian with Parks mirror. 1/20th wave. Movak components. $750. Celestron 11X80 binoculars. $175. 4 25" RFT. optical window. 2" focuser. $125. Please contact Phylis Rose at 253-8611, or Carlton Rose at 354-3632.

---

# SPACE UPDATE

## BY: ROBERT FINGERHUT

### DISCOVERY SCHEDULED FOR LAUNCH AUGUST 29

The shuttle orbiter Discovery was moved to the launch pad on August 9. The launch is scheduled for 5 35 am PDT on August 29th. The landing is scheduled for 6:31 am. September 4 at Edwards Air Force Base.

### ARIANE 3 SUCCESSFUL IN FIRST FLIGHT

The first flight of an Ariane 3 on Aug. 4 placed two satellites into geostationary transfer orbit from Kourou Guiana. The Ariane 3 was built by France's Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales and the European Space Agency's Eutelsat ECS-2. The next Ariane launch is scheduled for late Sept. or early Oct.

### STARSTRUCK LAUNCHES ITS DOLPHIN ROCKET

The Dolphin rocket made its first flight on August 3rd from near San Clemente Island. The vertical in the ocean launch lasted 28 seconds and reached an altitude of 2300 ft. The vehicle's hybrid propulsion system produced 35,000 lb. of thrust. The objective of the Dolphin program for the rocket is to develop a sounding rocket with improved reliability and higher altitude. There are two more Dolphin vehicles being manufactured.

### SPACE TELESCOPES PRIMARY MIRROR CLEANED

The mirror has baeen cleaned after it accidentally picked up a fine coating of dust while being stored at Perkin-Elmer. The cleaning operation used jets of dry nitrogen gas in conjunction with a special vacuum cleaner.

### VISITORS TO SALYUT 7 PERFORM SPACE WALK

The Soyuz T-17 docked with the Salyut 7 on July 18. The crew included mission commander Vladimir Dzhanibekov, flight engineer Georgi Grechko and research cosmonaut Igor Volk. Among their activities was a space walk by Dzhanibekov and Savitskaya. The first by a woman. The U.S. astronaut, Kathryn D. Sullivan, is scheduled to perform a space walk during the 41-G shuttle flight which is to be launched on Oct. 1.

### GOES-5 WEATHER SATELLITE FAILS

The satellite was blinded by the failure of a tungsten filament lamp on July 29. The GOES-6 satellite will be moved from its position above 135 deg. W. Long. to 98 Deg W. Long. so that it can cover both coasts of the U.S. When the GOES-7 satellite is launched the West will now not be visible. The new scheduled for launch in may 1986. A back up of both GOES-7 and 8 is being considered.

### AMPTE TRIPLE SATELLITE LAUNCHED

The satellites were launched atop a Delta booster from Kennedy launch complex 17. The U.S., British, and West German spacecraft are designed to study the Van Allen radiation belts, and to create a lilon artificial comet that will be visible on Earth. The AMPTE for Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Explorer consist the following: the Composition Explorer, the United Kingdom Subsatellite, and the West German Ion Release Module.

=== PAGE 3 ===
# SJAA

## GENERAL MEETINGS:

University of Santa Clara, Alumni Science Hall, room 102. Take north on Hwy 17, exit at Bascom/Washington Ave. and proceed to Franklin, then turn right (heading south to Hwy 17, exit at the Alameda (north), proceed to Franklin, then turn left. Go two blocks and turn left into the parking lot - Alumni Science Hall is the two story building that is in front of you. You can't miss it. Room 102 is on the ground floor and is best gotten to by entering the first door on the right side of the building when walking in from the parking lot.

[Simple map diagram showing Alumni Science Hall location with roads: THE ALAMEDA, ALVISO, HACKETT, and HWY 17]

## INDOOR STAR PARTIES:

Los Gatos Red Cross Building, 18011 Los Gatos-Almaden Rd. Turn west on Bear Avenue south take the Hwy 9 (Saratoga) exit and continue up Los Gatos Saratoga road for about 1.5 miles. Turn right at Rose Ave., and turn right immediately into the parking lot of the Red Cross Building.

[Simple map showing LOS GATOS-SARATOGA RD with RED CROSS location]

## GRANT RANCH COUNTY PARK:

This site is a new one for the SJAA so come and try it out. Located on Mt. Hamilton Road, halfway between San Jose and Lick Observatory. To get there, Hamilton Road take Hwy 130 (Alum Rock (direction) to Alum Rock Park). At Mt. Hamilton-Rock Road. Junction on Hamilton Road and follow it. Grant Ranch is just past the Quimby road intersection. After sunset the park front gate will be locked with the SJAA's combination lock. Use the sequence 05, 06, 07, 08, 09, 10 if you are arriving behind you coming or going. There are two gates, so lock one or the exit gate, if so enter the park from this gate.

[Simple map showing MT. HAMILTON RD, QUIMBY RD, and HWY 680 with "TO LICK OBS." noted]

## HENRY COE STATE PARK:

Take Hwy 101 south towards Gilroy and take the East Dunne exit. Continue east towards the main park (past Anderson Reservoir) for about 13 miles, from the highway. At the main gate you will see old ranch buildings on the right and a horse trough. The park is locked but the club combination is 4565. Always lock the gate after yourself. If arriving after dark, please park outside the gate and hike in first. Do not drive. Be quiet in and observing in. Parking lights only after dark, please.

[Simple map showing ANDERSON RESERVOIR, COE, HWY 101 SOUTH, and BYPASS SECTION to GILROY]

## FREMONT PEAK STATE PARK:

Take Hwy 101 south towards Salinas. Take Hwy 156 east (San Juan Bautista) for two miles to a yellow flashing light. Turn right and go up the hill in the direction of the observatory, to the left and splits. Stay left for about 50 yards and then bear right when road splits again. Follow road for about 11 miles up into the park. SJAA sets up in Coulter Camp overflow area. It's visible as you drive up into main area of camp. Parking lights only after dark, please.

[Simple map showing FREMONT PEAK, COULTER CAMP, TO SALINAS, HWY 101 S., YELLOW LIGHT, HWY 156 E., and SAN JUAN BAUTISTA]

EPHEMERIS is published monthly by the San Jose Astronomical Association, 3905 Calico Ave., San Jose, Cas. 95124

## OFFICERS:

**PRESIDENT** Dave Ambrose 816 Everett St. El Cerrito, CA. 94530 (415) 524-6869

**Vice-Pres** Denni Medlock 15022 Broadway Terrace, Oakland, CA. 95124 (415) 654-6796

**Sec.** James Van Nuland 3509 Calico Ave., San Jose, CA. 95124 (408) 371-1307

**Treas.** Robert Fingerhut 340 Rio Verde Place, Milpitas, CA. 95035 (408) 263-4455

## BOARD OF DIRECTORS:

Paul Mancuso (408) 946-0738, Steve Greenberg (415) 443-8698, Jim Ahl (408) 997-1389, Gene Cisneros (408) 923-6800, Joe Sunseri, Chris Pratt (408) 629-2994

EPHEMERIS EDITOR: John Gleason 5361 Port Sailwood Dr.,Newark, CA. 94560

=== PAGE 4 ===
# THE SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION

Deep-sky observing, Astrophotography, Telescope making, Eclipses, Computerized astronomy. Whatever your astronomical interest, you will find others in the San Jose Astronomical Association who will enjoy sharing their knowledge with you.

## ACTIVITIES

The SJAA sponsors an activity every Saturday night (except around certain holidays):

General Meetings, featuring programs on various astronomical topics, are held once a month at the Alumni Science Building at the University of Santa Clara.

At Parties-Star-gazing/observing sessions-are held at various dark-sky locations, some close to the San Jose area, and some in the adjacent mountains.

Indoor "Star Parties" provide an informal opportunity to show slides, work on equipment, exchange ideas, etc. They are held in the Los Gatos Red Cross building.

## MEMBERSHIP BENEFITS

You need not be a member of the San Jose Astronomical Association to participate in our activities, but membership does grant some advantages:

Twelve months of **Sky and Telescope magazine**, and reduced rates on periodicals from Sky Publishing Corporation.

The **SJAA EPHEMERIS**, our monthly newsletter, containing a calendar of events and activities, and other information about the SJAA. (Separate newsletter-only subscriptions are available.) Access to the SJAA's library of books, magazines, and pamphlets.

The San Jose Astronomical Association, founded in 1954, is a non-profit group devoted to expanding the general public's interest in astronomy, conducting research within the capabilities of amateurs, and promoting the science of astronomy.

**MEMBERSHIP ONLY: $8.00     MEMBERSHIP/S&T: $21.00     JUNIOR (UNDER 12): $15.00**

---

# SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION

Name ____________________________________________

Address __________________________________________

__________________________________________________

Telephone (______) __________________________________

Please bring this form to any SJAA meeting, or send to:
Robert Fingerhut, Treas.
San Jose Astronomical Association
340 Rio Verde Pl. #4, Milpitas, CA 95035

[Phone: (408) 263-4455]

Membership: Adult ___ Junior (under 18) ___
*Bulletin* Subscription only: ___

## Questionnaire (optional)

What are your astronomical interests (e.g. astrophotography, deep-sky observation, telescope making, etc.)? ____________________________________________

__________________________________________________

__________________________________________________

__________________________________________________

Do you own a telescope? _________ If so, what kind?

__________________________________________________

Is there any specific area of astronomy that you feel qualified to help others with? ____________________

__________________________________________________

__________________________________________________

=== PAGE 5 ===
# CALICO OBSERVATORY

## JUPITER'S RED SPOT EPHEMERIDES
BY: JIM VAN NULAND

Here is a handy list of times convenient for successful spot-watching. The Spot is readily seen with an 8-inch and for the experienced observer with instruments as small as 2 inches. However the Great Red Spot on Jupiter has faded from its brick red color to a dull gray-pink over the past few years. Jupiter offers a rather rare treat at the low declination position does not always afford the best of seeing conditions. Please drop Jim a card indicating any of your observational results! The Red Spot and many smaller white spots in Jupiter's atmosphere have been easily observed in my 3.5 inch Questar. (Ed.)

### Great Red Spot on Meridian -- PDT

| da mo | d | h m | | da mo d | h m |
|-------|---|-----|---|---------|-----|
| Sa 9 | 7 | 11 57 pm | | E 9 21 | 7 31 pm |
| Tu 9 | 4 | 8 26 pm | | Su 9 23 | 9 10 pm |
| Th 9 | 9 | 10 5 pm | | E 9 28 | 8 14 pm |
| Tu 9 | 11 | 9 11 pm | | W 10 3 | 7 31 pm |
| Su 9 | 16 | 8 28 pm | | F 10 5 | 9 3 pm |
| Tu 9 | 18 | 10 4 pm | | W 10 10 | 8 19 pm |

## COMET COMMENTS

BY: DON MACHHOLZ

One new and somewhat unusual comet has been discovered if should be visible in our southern sky. Another bright comet is visible in our morning sky, and a faint periodic comet is visible in the southern Milk Way. We'll check up on Halley's Comet, too. In our past discoveries section we'll look at the types of instruments used and the number of hours spent to find comets in the past few years.

### COMET AUSTIN (1984j)

As reported last month, Rodney Austin found this comet while it was making random swings toward and away from the Sun in early July. This comet was closest the Sun (1.29 AU) on August 12, it moved into our morning sky in late August. It is now visible, but fading, so get out to see this comet soon.

#### Comet Austin (1984j)

| | | | | This | comet |
|---|---|---|---|------|-------|
| 08-28 | 09h 12.3m | +22°48' | 22° | 8.5 | rapidly away |
| 08-30 | 09h 30.2m | +25°13' | 30° | 9.2 | from the |
| 09-07 | 08h 43.5m | +27°45' | 38° | 9.6 | but towards |
| 09-12 | 08h 57.7m | +30°12' | 46° | 10.3 | the Earth. |
| 09-17 | 08h 24.5m | +32°47' | 54° | 10.6 | It is in our |
| 09-22 | 08h 05.9m | +35°33' | 62° | 10.9 | morning NE sky |
| 09-27 | 07h 51.9m | +38°45' | 72° | 11.2 | and may be as |
| 10-02 | 07h 43.8m | +41°44' | 62° | 11.4 | much as one |
| 10-07 | 06h 52.4m | +44°35' | 93° | 11.5 | magnitude |
| 10-12 | 06h 18.2m | +47°42' | 105° | 11.7 | brighter than |

will be moving
Sun, elongation
predicted and
display a
short tail.

### PERIODIC COMET TAKAMIZAWA (1984i)

This comet was discovered on July 30 by the Japanese observer Takamizawa. At that time it was a ninth magnitude object about ten degrees south of M27. We now know that the comet is periodic with a period of about 13 years. In early August it was closest the Sun (1.57 AU) on May 25, and is presently about one astronomical unit outside of our orbit and practically running with us. If the comet behaves normally, it should be visible to us through October.

#### Periodic Comet Takamizawa (1984i)

| | | | | This | newly- |
|---|---|---|---|------|--------|
| 08-28 | 21h 05.5m | -22°39' | 157° | 9.6 | discovered |
| 09-02 | 21h 11.2m | -23°24' | 147° | 10.1 | comet should |
| 09-17 | 21h 41.9m | -24°39' | 138° | 10.5 | remain a fair |
| 09-27 | 21h 17.5m | -24°29' | 130° | 10.8 | object if it |
| 10-07 | 21h 25.8m | -23°58' | 122° | 11.2 | remains bright |
| 10-17 | 21h 35.9m | -23°11' | 115° | 11.5 | enough to |

appear small, about 1-2 min in diameter as it moves away from the Earth and Sun.

Why wasn't the comet found sooner? A prediscovery ephemeris shows that the comet was in the morning sky all year, brightening slowly from mag. 11 in early March to 9.5 in early June. On three occasions during those months I swept the area containing the comet. I picked up fainter globular clusters and nebulae, but not the comet. Additionally, early observations show some inconsistencies is its appearance and brightness; it seems likely that the comet looked very faint or brightened rapidly shortly before discovery, future observations will help to confirm this.

#### HALLEY'S COMET ON SEPTEMBER 14

RA: 06hr 45.4m DEC: v13deg 13' Distance from the Sun: 6.23 AU. Distance from the Earth: 6.50 AU. Mag: 19.5

"What is the best telescope for discovering a comet, and how long does it take to find one?" These are two questions often asked of comet hunters.There is, probably no "best" because all comets, and all amateur comet hunters are different. And as for the amount of time needed to find a comet, there is not just skill involved, but a lot of luck too!

Here is a tabulation of the amateur comet hunters available to us right now, but all Not all the information is available, but this should give us some idea of the instruments used and time spent. I'll list the discoverer's name, the comet I'll list the elongation from the Sun in degrees [with Evening or Evening sky], and the number hours of discovery. An accidental discovery is listed as "Acc".

| Discoverer | Comet | Instrument | Mag. | Hours |
|------------|-------|------------|------|-------|
| With Binoculars | | | | |
| Bradfield | 1980t | 7 x 35mm | 6.0 | 113 |
| Cernis | 1983m | 15 x 80mm | 5.8 | --- |
| Hartley | 1984a | 12 x 80mm | 9.4 | 4 |
| Petrauskas | 1983d | 12 x 80mm | 9.5 | 108 |
| Cernis | 1983k | 20 x 110mm | 9.5 | 886 |

With Refractors

| | | | | |
|---------|-------|-------------------|------|-----|
| Hamada | 1978j | 3.3" | 10.0 | 463 |
| Campos | 1978l | 5" | 10.0 | 116 |
| Bradfield | 1975d | 6", f/5.5, 26x. | 9.0 | 145 |
| Bradfield | 1979e | 6", f/5.5, 26x. | 9.5 | 106 |
| Bradfield | 1976a | 6", f/5.5, 26x. | 9.4 | 57 |
| Bradfield | 1976d | 6", f/5.5, 26x. | 8.8 | 9 |
| Bradfield | 1976e | 6", f/5.5, 26x. | 8.0 | 368 |
| Bradfield | 1978c | 6", f/5.5, 26x. | 8.4 | 75 |
| Bradfield | 1979c | 6", f/5.5, 26x. | 10.2 | 95 |
| Bradfield | 1979l | 6", f/5.5, 26x. | 5.0 | 67 |
| Rubini | 1969d | 6", f/8, 18x. | 10.4 | 121 |

As we can see, a wide variety of instruments has been used for discoveries and for the time spent on each comet, those 20 times show an equal 547 hours giving an average of 273.7 hours/find for those especially discovering multiple comets. If we were to combine Bradfield's twelve comets, at an average of 2092 hours. If we were to know the times for all 28 amateur discoveries during this time period, the actual figure may differ somewhat. But these facts do seem to show that comet is available to anyone with a telescope and dark skies, and a telescope or binoculars.

=== PAGE 6 ===
# ATM coatings

**15022 BROADWAY TERRACE, OAKLAND, CA 94611**

Specializing in Aluminum Coatings with silicon monoxide
over-coating for telescope mirrors

|  | |
|---|---|
| 4½" | $8.00 |
| 6" | $12.00 |
| Secondaries, when sent with primary mirror, free | 8" | $16.00 |
| To remove old coatings $3.00 Minimum charge $8.00 | 10" | $20.00 |
| Include postage and insurance for return mail. | 12½" | $24.00 |
| Mirror will be shipped in container received | 14¼" | $28.00 |
|  | 16" | $50.00 |

Commercial ads are priced according to size and may be placed by contacting:
Gene Cisneros at (408) 923-6801.

[CENTER IMAGE: Black and white astronomical photograph]

**LUMICON®**

*"Innovation In Astronomy"*

Visit or call LUMICON®
for the most complete selection
of IN STOCK Telescope and
Accessories in the West.

**★ WORLD CENTER FOR
ASTROPHOTOGRAPHY ★**

(415) 447-9570
2111 Research Dr #5E,
Livermore CA 94550

---

SJAA EPHEMERIS
3509 CALICO AVE
SAN JOSE, CA 95124

BULK RATE
U.S. POSTAGE PAID
PERMIT NO. 5381
SAN JOSE, CA. 95125

---

TIME VALUE-DATED
NEWS MATERIAL