=== PAGE 1 ===
I apologize, but I cannot extract any text from this image. The image appears to be an artistic black and white photograph or photogram showing abstract shapes and silhouettes against a light background. There is no visible text content to transcribe from this scanned document page.

If you're expecting text content from this document, it's possible that:
1. The image quality or contrast may be preventing text from being visible
2. This may be the wrong page or image
3. The document may be purely visual/artistic in nature without text content

Please verify the image or provide a different page if you were expecting text content to be present.

=== PAGE 2 ===
# OCTOBER '76

**St. Raiders**  
292-0107

## WHAT'S GOING ON IN THE CLUB :

**October 1:** Olinder Center 7:30 P.M.

The main occurance at this month's general meeting will be a talk by John Rhodes. His subject will be "How far are the stars."

**October 8:** John Rhodes' home 8:00 P.M. board meeting

**October 23:** Skyline site New moon star party

The October star party was listed last month as to be located at Henry Coe State Park. However since we couldn't be certain of when the park will reopen, the Skyline site was chosen. This area was used extensively in the past by the S.J.A.A. and has an excellent western sky.

**November 5:** Olinder Center 7:30 P.M.

Themeeting for november should feature a presentation on the Viking mission. The specifics have not been worked out at the time of this writing so I am unable to provide further information.

**November 12:** Debbie Moore's home 8:00 P.M. board meeting

**November 20:** El Sereno dusk till dawn

Again we are using the EL sereno Open Space Preserve for a star party. This area has proven itself to be a fine place for amateur astronomy while being near enough for most of us.

You may wish to update your membership list with these additional names of new or returning members.

William McPeak 4563 Grimsby Dr. San Jose Ca. 95130 379-2071

Jim Loos 13680 Rossmere Ct. Saratoga, Ca. 95070 867-1264

J. Emmet Murphy 65 South 9th st.#3 San Jose Ca. 95112 287-6378

George R. Cook 905 Seena Av. Ca. Los Altos 94022 961-1577

John Delaney 2410 Woodland Av. San Jose Ca. 95128 296-8559

Bill Tamblyn 1176 Dresdin Wy. San Jose Ca. 95129 253-2278

Cover photo: John Rhodes & John Gleason

=== PAGE 3 ===
# OCCULTING ZONE

| Oct. | PDT | Mag. | CA | PA | Star; Notes |
|------|-----|------|----|----|-------------|
| 3 | 7:33:33D | 6.2 | 38s | 127 | 47 Cap |
| 18 | 3:52:33R | 5.5 | 41s | 237 | w Leo A.M. Time |
| 26 | 7:35:47D | 8.2 | 73n | 71 | |
| | 7:50:23D | 9.0 | 80n | 78 | |
| | 8:11:57D | 7.2 | 15S | 163 | Near-graze-- times may be a few min. |
| | 8:20:36R | | 1S | 178 | off. See below. |
| | 8:38:01D | 7.3 | 65S | 113 | |
| 27 | 8:25:28D | 6.9 | 80S | 93 | Double-- NO sep. available. |
| 28 | 8:19:16D | 8.6 | 9N | 358 | May ne difficult. |

Mostly single stars this month--none very bright. To best see dim stars near the moon, use medium-high power. Iuse 133X, giving 20' of field. This gets the bright part of the moon out of the field. Do the finding and preliminary focusing with your off eye to keep your good eye dark adapted. The dark limb should be visible for most of these events. Final focusing should be done on the star not part of the moon.

Finding the stars-- if you don't know which way is north in your field, allow the moon or a star to drift through the field-- it always moves west, PA=270. Remember that position angle starts at north and goes CCW in a two-mirror scope, CW in a one or three mirror scope (includes star diagonal). If you turn the diagonal you also rotate the field, so get comfortable first.

Cusp Angle is measured away from the bright limb out into the dark moon, in either direction. 0=cusp, 90=midway between. If you can't find any stars, tell me and I'll try to write better instructions. TIME may vary up to a minute. Start watching about 15 min. early to get a feel for how fast the moon approaches the star. Average rate is 2 min. of time per minute of arc. The star may hang on the dark limb for several seconds before final snapping out.

The near-graze on the 26th may occur a few minutes early or late depending on your position. If it disappears late, expect the re-appearance to be early by about double the amount,etc.

| Date | Time | |
|------|------|---|
| Su 3 | 1:07 AM | On to another kind of peek-a-boo -- the Great Red |
| Tu 5 | 10:36 PM | Spot. Predictions are based on Gerry Rattley's obs- |
| Su 10 | 9:43 PM | ervations as I have been unable to observe it. The |
| Tu 12 | 11:21 PM | spot has shifted about 35 minutes early, so new pre- |
| F 15 | 0:59 AM | diction equations are being developed. Gerry advises |
| Su 17 | 10:29 PM | that there is a lot of activity on Jupiter currently, |
| W 20 | 0:07 AM | so get out and grab a piece of the action. |
| F 22 | 9:36 PM | These times are the evening passages, starting ab- |
| SU 24 | 3:22 AM | out 90 min. after planet-rise. All are PDT or PST. |
| Su 24 | 11:14 PM | The time given is for the spot to be central on the |
| W 27 | 0:52 AM | planet, so it will be observable about an hour before |
| W 27 | 8:43 PM | and after the stated times. The spot moves to the west |
| Su 31 | 10:59 PM | by it's own length in about 24 minutes, so things |
| | | change quite rapidly. |

Jim Van Nuland