=== PAGE 1 ===
# San Jose

# Amateur Astronomers

## Bulletin

**Bob Malm. editor (941-1343)**

## SJAA Officers

**JANUARY 1975**

President: Tom Mungall 257-3262
Vice-president: Brian Day 266-8690
Treasurer: Jerry Rattley 732-0202
Secretary: Norman Wild 252-8966

Board members: Dave Erickson Bob Malm
Tom Curtis
A.B. Gregory
Jim Van Nuland
Jim Vermilion

**RECENT ACTIVITIES:** The general meeting of December 6, 1974 was divided into two parts. Part one was devoted to a description of the club's new observatory site by Tom Mungall. He described the general layout and discussed the progress of the road and parking area which was being bulldozed. The members will get an opportunity (weather permitting) to try out the new Mt. Umunhum site at this month's star party. It will be necessary, however, for all who use the site to do so at their own risk and to sign a statement to that effect. This procedure will save the club much $$$$$$$ which would otherwise have to be spent on insurance. While no site that we obtain can be perfect in all respects, it seems that most of the controversy over the site centers around the spelling of its name. Perhaps this problem will be resolved before the lease runs out.

Then Dave Erickson delivered a talk on the theory and construction of the Wright-Schmidt telescope, and the theory behind cold camera useage. After examining Dave's latest photos taken with his home-built instrument, there was general agreement that the pictures compared favorably with professional photographs taken on much larger telescopes.

The star party of December 14, 1974 at Henry Coe Park was cancelled due to weather.

**COMING EVENTS:** Friday, January 3, 1975 at 7:30 P.M. at Olinder Center. An up-to-date report from the planet Jupiter by Mr. Northwang from Ames Research Center (NASA). Included will be a film, summing up the information received from Pioneer 10 during its flyby.

> Friday, January 10, 1975 at 8 P.M. The meeting of the Board at Norm Wild's home. Members are always welcome at board meetings.

> Saturday January 11, 1975. First star party at the club's newly leased observing site on Mt. Umunhum. Note the enclosed map. Be careful not to go past the observing site as your editor did, or you will end up at the base of a huge radar installation with military police giving you dirty looks.

**NEW MEMBERS:** Please welcome the following people to the association and add their names to your membership list.

Steve Rios 4421 Thousand Oaks Drive, San Jose, Ca. 95123 267-0350

Sandy Lester 6095 Chesbro Ave., San Jose, Ca. 95123 225-9221

Edmund C. Morgan 1964 Kirby Way, San Jose, Ca. 95124 377-4393

Karen Enslen 2950 Postwood Drive San Jose, Ca. 95132 262-5237

Scott Hares 5110 Gallant Fox Ave. San Jose, Ca. 95111 225-0336

=== PAGE 2 ===
# ELEVATION 3,000 FT.

**SJAA SITE**

SITE ENTRANCE AT CROSSROAD

DIRT RD.

DIRT RD

DIRT RD

PAVED RD

**X**

APPROX 1600 FT FROM PAVED RD. TO SITE ENTRANCE

OWNERS TRAILER (CAN BE SEEN AT THIS POINT)

**RADAR STATION**

KEEP AWAY OR THE GOVERNMENT WILL GET AFTER YOU!

WARNING SIGN & CATTLE GUARD

## MT. UMUNHUM

**AVERAGE WIND SPEED 10 TO 20 M.P.H.**

**TEMPERATURE EXTREMES -10° TO 110°**

**AVERAGE SNOWFALL 3 TO 4 FT.**

WARNING SIGN & CATTLE GUARD

**AVERAGE TRAVEL TIME TO TOP 25 MIN DISTANCE - 12 MILES**

**TO LOS GATOS**

HICKS RD SHANNON RD

CAMDEN RD

BLOSSOM HILL RD

↑ S