=== PAGE 1 ===
# THE SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION

# EPHEMERIS

## MARCH 1985

---

**MARCH 30TH GENERAL MEETING**  
**NASA PROJECT MANAGER NICK VOJVODICH WILL**  
**PRESENT A PROGRAM ON THE GALILEO/JUPITER**  
**ORBITING PLANETARY MISSION**

---

**MARCH 2** Los Gatos Red Cross Building. Indoor star party. Doors open at 8 pm. Don MacNholz will be giving an informal talk on the up coming Messier Marathon's. March 15, 16 and the 23rd.

**MARCH 9** Board meeting 8 pm at Robert Fingerhut's home. If you want to attend, please give Bob a call for directions to his house.

**MARCH 15/16** Messier Marathon Part I at Long Peak observation site. For additional information please call Don MacNholz at: (408) 448-7077

**MARCH 23** Messier Marathon Part II at Grant Ranch county park.

**MARCH 30** General meeting 8 p.m. at the University of Santa Clara Alumni Science building. Nick Vojvodich, NASA's project manager for the Galileo space probe will be our guest speaker. This should be a most informative talk about one of NASA's last planetary probes to Jupiter this century.

**APRIL 6** Los Gatos Red Cross build. Indoor star party. Doors open at 8 p.m.

**APRIL 12** Board meeting at Chris Pratt's house. 7 p.m. "POT LUCK"

**APRIL 13** Fremont Peak Field Expedition for astronomical observation. Dusk till Dawn.

**APRIL 20** Second Annual star party at Henry Coe State Park. Dusk till Dawn.

**APRIL 27** ASTRONOMY DAY!

## ASTRO ADS

New, never used Celestron 5.5" f/1.85 Schmidt camera, with Celestar 8, and filter film holders. Adaptors for mounting to Celestar, C14, & C8s, 35% off field cost. $1025 Great for Halley's comet! List $1065 Selling for $700 Save $305!!!!! Contact: John Gleason (415) 790-9250

Excellent condition Celestron 8 and two Binoculars. New modes with extra from hinge for strength and ridigity. Great for comet Halley! Celestron list! Price: $364 Selling for $200 Save $164!!!!! Contact: John Gleason (415) 790-9250

---

## TUCSON 85' BY: DAVID LEVEY

Go west, stargazer, the clarion calls as Tucson prepares to host the 1985 Astronomical Society convention that promises something truly special. Beginning on the new moon which is the evening of June 8 and running through Saturday the 22nd, the five day convention will consist of tours, paper sessions, outings, dinners, parties and contests.

### TOUR OF KITT PEAK.

We all know this observatory as one of the largest and most important in the world. a place where galaxy-breaking research is done on state-of-the-art equipment. We'll get a chance to look at some of that during the convention.

### MMT

The Multiple Mirror Telescope, the forerunner of what will likely be a whole series of especially designed and productive telescopes, will also be on our tour. This is one telescope whose access road can't handle large numbers of visitors. this tour is limited to those who register early.

### OBSERVING SESSIONS

June is traditionally one of Tucson's driest months, and the warm, dry, mosquito-free evenings should keep the skies clear as we're planning observing sessions for a number of sites both outside and inside the city. Visitors will also be able to see some of the unique telescopes belonging to the collections of some of our local astronomers.

### CONTESTS

This year we are planning but one contest. You can bring telescope astrophotographs, observing projects, writting material, or anything else you wish. If your entry meetis the standards that will be set by our panel of judges than you may win a prize.

For further information about Tucson 85', contact: David H. Levey, Chairman, Tuscon Convention Committee, Rt 7, Box 414, Tucson, AZ. 85747

---

## UNIVERSE MAGAZINE

Man has always looked to the heavens with curiosity and marvel. Man has come far more today than when Galileo first focused his telescope on the Milky Way, but there is still so much to learn. Now, you can explore our world and beyond on the KCBS Universe Magazine.

The Universe Magazine seeks to interview/call-in program that seeks to provide listeners ready access to scientists and their discoveries. In the nineteen months that it has been in existence, a wide range of topics from dinosaurs to the search for extraterrestrial intelligence have been discussed.

You can hear it on Saturday evenings from 8:00 PM to 8:00 PM. on KCBS AM radio.

=== PAGE 2 ===
# DEEP SKY NOTES - MARCH
## BY: STEVE GOTTLIEB

Sandwiched between the prominent constellations of Gemini and Leo is the inconspicuous grouping of Cancer. Though containing no stars brighter than mag. 4, Cancer's nevertheless an attention grabber for owners of small telescopes. Centered here is the bright, large, naked-eye cluster M44. Besides splashy M44 and the rich, ancient cluster M67 found 9 deg. south, Cancer contains numerous lesser known galaxies, many appearing in pairs and groups. These multiple galaxy groupings were recently explored using 17.5" and 24.5" reflectors operating from Foothills near Fiddletown and at Fremont Peak on the weekend of January 18-19, 1985.

**NGC 2535** The brighter member (Mp 13.5) of an interacting pair, NGC 2535 can be found by locating mag. 6.4 Iota-1 Cancri and offsetting 23' N. The 45 deg. tilted, SC galaxy appears faint, fairly small, round and diffuse. I probably only observed the brighter central region.

**NGC 2536:** Just 2' SE of NGC 2535 is a round, small, and very faint companion [Mp 14.8] to NGC 2535. An excellent photo of this system appears in Timothy Ferris' GALAXIES on page 146. In this shot, NGC 2536 appears to be located at the tip of one of the spiral arms of NGC 2535.

**NGC 2608:** Plotted on the Tiron SKY STLAS 2000 in northern Cancer, this barred spiral was elongated ENE-WSW, moderately large, and fairly diffuse [Mp 13.2] but contained a condensed core. Photographs reveal a double nucleus or a centrally located superimposed star.

**NGC 2619:** Located 33' ENE in the same low power field, this spiral appeared as a slightly fainter [Mp 13.6] twin of NGC 2608. Though the size of NGC 2619 was similar to NGC 2608, the elongation was NE-SW and the surface brightness was smoother.

**NGC 2672:** This small elliptical galaxy is plotted on the Tirlor Atlas 2 deg. SE of M44, just 1/2deg. NW of a mag. 8 star. At 165x, it appeared small, roundish, moderately bright [Mp 13.0] with a small condensed nucleus and an elongation 9' N-S. NGC 2672 is close to the east edge of NGC 2677. Appearance on the Palomar Observatory Sky Survey is very compact.

**NGC 2752:** The last member of the NGC 2749 group which I located was another marginal object [Mp 14.8] found 5.4' ENE of NGC 2749. Though I recorded no details due to the distracting close, bright double star just NE of NGC 2752, it appeared as a small edge-on spiral on the POSS print.

---

# FROM THE EDITORS DESK
## BY: JOHN GLEASON

A special thanks to those of you who responded to my call last month for telephone numbers. In this issue you will find the 1985 Members List. Membership renewals are now available for new members. Extras will be available from Jim Van Nuland and Bob Fingerhut.

I understand that there are a number of members who get their Ephemeris late or a week after it is mailed. I would like to contact these members who get the Ephemeris a day after I mail it. All of this has to do with the 3rd class bulk rate ZIP code prefort! Many members do not fall into an identical 5 digit sort, not a 3 digit sort! These members get an all state bundle which is probably the reason it takes so long to get to them. Send me this months Ephemeris a little late? than usual due to a major computer crash which locked up my March Ephemeris files for 7 days! So much for modern technology.

The 5th ANNUAL ASTRONOMICAL AUCTION will be held on Saturday, May 4th at the Los Gatos Red Cross Building. Doors will be open at 2 p.m. This is one of the biggest astronomical events in the bay area. Plan now to attend. Preregistration information is in this months Ephemeris.

Your editor is still looking for star party reports: I have heard that the last two star parties were well attended and that the weather was excellent for this time of year.

---

# 107 EVENTS OBSERVED ON GRAZE EXPEDITION BY A SINGLE OBSERVER
## BY: SHIELA MACDOUGAL, SJAA

On the evening of 20 February (29 February UT) the star Gamma Globulin was scheduled to be occulted by the local Moon. Gemma Globulin was quite bright, a +1.7 refractor together. I headed out to the graze site using the map drawn by the expedition leader who has no sense of direction and cannot make a strpght line even with a ruler. When I finally arrived, the graze team members were busily hunting for station markers buried in the past. I made it just in time to meet the Clerk, notinq for the first time by the inscription that the lens had been blanched and have been cast by the Coca Cola Corporation. As the graze moment approached, music of the fighting over choice sites had subsided and we started gazing into the sky looking for the star. (I believe the Moon was already up - they us with finder charts as previously promised). It was all rather academic anyway due to the heavy cloud layers building up, causing an estimate a decrease of visual extinction of [on top of 1 magnitude of extinction due to local moisture].

Undaunted, I searched with the Clork until I could just barely make out the full Moon. I tried calling out to the other nearby stations that I had discovered the Moon but the melodious tones of "WAV masked my screeching. A few accurately tossed rocks got everyone's attention and we all stood around watching the Moon but I never did see the 21st magnitude star. I could hear shouts of "OUT" "IN" "BLINK" "MISS" and "FLASH" all up and down the observing line as we recorded the passage of clouds over the Moon. It was an exciting time and I was quite disappointed when the Clerk said, to go "better grass, if that bright Moon hadn't been so close to the star.

I look eagerly to the next graze expedition and have been pestering the expedition leader for more details on when it is to occur. Hopefully, more people will go. Finally he relented and said, "Why don't you just go out beyond Yuma someplace in July, about Noon some day"! I have it marked on my calendar.

---

# ATM coatings

15022 BROADWAY TERRACE, OAKLAND, CA 94611

Specializing in Aluminum Coatings with silicon monoxide over-coating for telescope mirrors

| Size | Price |
|------|-------|
| 4¼" | $8.00 |
| 6" | $12.00 |
| 8" | $18.00 |

Secondaries, when sent with primary mirror, free

To remove old coatings $3.00 Minimum charge $8.00

Include postage and insurance for return mail.

Mirror will be shipped in container received

| Size | Price |
|------|-------|
| 10" | $20.00 |
| 12½" | $24.00 |
| 14½" | $28.00 |
| 16" | $50.00 |

=== PAGE 3 ===
# SAN JOSE ASTRONOMIVAL ASSOCIATION 1985 MEMBERSHIP

| Name | Address | City, State, Zip | Phone |
|------|---------|------------------|-------|
| Albrecht<br>Allen Jr.<br>Ambrose<br>Anderson<br>Anderson<br>Bally<br>Barroso<br>Barreto<br>Bateson<br>Bayne<br>Baumgardt<br>Bell<br>Bernitt<br>Berritto<br>Black<br>Blomau<br>Bowman<br>Bradford<br>Brainiff<br>Brattling<br>Bridich<br>Brown<br>Busno<br>Callender<br>Carmichel<br>Cerro<br>Cheberg<br>Cherington<br>Chestnut<br>Chiang<br>Christopherson<br>Cisneros<br>Clark<br>Congdon<br>Cook<br>Cooper<br>Cooper<br>Corwin<br>Cottchie<br>Curzon<br>Daniels | Tom<br>Harold S. M.<br>Norris<br>Doug & Mary<br>Doris & Virma<br>Davis & Virma<br>John<br>Joel<br>Richard<br>Paul<br>Carl<br>Jim<br>Trudy<br>William L.<br>Pat<br>Robert H.<br>Matt<br>Clarence O.<br>Fred<br>Thomas & Carol<br>Norman<br>Carl D.<br>Tony<br>Roger<br>Ron<br>Gary<br>Michael & Carrie<br>William<br>William<br>William T. Rae<br>Michael<br>Francisco Eugene<br>Craig<br>George<br>David E.<br>Paul<br>Leo<br>Ray<br>Peter<br>Pat | 1260 Butterfly Dr.<br>Box 414<br>1337 Carlos Ave.<br>811 Everets Dr.<br>3206 Lansford Ave.<br>3677 Ellmann Pl.<br>1704 Naglee Dr.<br>1998 W. Hedding<br>1520 Santa Maria<br>1466 Berry Way<br>24260 Ewell St.<br>911 Plcamuno Real #3<br>PO Box 8 Calle Suite 14M<br>3179 Britton #2<br>693 Valley Way<br>1050 Mathew Ct. Ave.<br>1345 El Monte Rd.<br>2090 Scenic Vista<br>2820 N Blaney Ave.<br>814 S Saratoga Ave.<br>4101 W California Ave, #1407<br>10916 Saich Way<br>7776 Mathilda Ave. #282<br>6912 Crockett Ave.<br>1958 Prescott Dr.<br>6106 Cecala Dr.<br>1200 Fremont Dr.<br>993 Britton Ave.<br>367 - 21 St Ave.<br>5 Mcfarland Ct.<br>5G Mcfarland House<br>12400 Maybury Rd.<br>5 Lococo Way<br>15840 E Alta Vista Way<br>1638 Olenhurst Dr. #2<br>6079 Silver Creek Dr.<br>3830 Magnolia Dr.<br>5744 Pontiac Dr.<br>1608 Kirkwood Dr.<br>2201b Ybarra Rd.<br>Box 468<br>1708 N Griffith Way | San Jose, CA. 95120<br>Sunnyvale, CA. 95086<br>Burlingame, CA. 94010<br>Mt View, CA. 94040<br>San Jose, CA. 94086<br>Fremont, CA. 95136<br>San Jose, CA. 95125<br>Toles Way, San Jose<br>San Jose, CA.<br>San Jose, CA.<br>Mt View, CA. 95124<br>Mountain View, CA. 94014<br>Burlingame, CA. 94010<br>San Jose, San Jose, CA. 95126<br>San Carlos, CA. 94070<br>Santa Clara, CA. 95054<br>Santa Clara, CA. 95051<br>Los Altos, CA. 94022<br>San Jose, CA. 95120<br>San Marcos, CA. 95035<br>San Jose, CA. 95019<br>Sunnyvale, CA. 95036<br>Sunnyvale, CA. 95014<br>Sunnyvale, CA. 90087<br>San Jose, CA.<br>Campbell, CA. 95008<br>San Jose, CA. 95202<br>San Jose, CA. 95122<br>San Jose, CA. 95133<br>San Francisco, 94121<br>San Jose, CA. 95141<br>Stafford, CA. 94505<br>San Jose, CA. 95233<br>San Jose, CA. 94087<br>San Jose, CA. 95127<br>San Jose, CA.<br>Palo Alto, CA. 95244<br>San Jose, CA. 95303<br>Palo Alto, CA. 95306<br>San Jose, CA. 95133<br>Woodland HI. (A. 95364<br>San Carley, CA. 94305<br>Pacheo, CA. 93708 | (408) 997-1383<br>(415) 344-0683<br>(415) 692-9669<br>(415) 964-0084<br>(209) 663-1021<br>(408) 264-1320<br>(108) 377-0148<br>(415) 347-2677<br>(415) 477-4225<br>(415) 592-4253<br>(408) 248-3923<br>(415) 591-2456<br>(408) 268-7090<br>(408) 446-0144<br>(408) 240-0119<br>(408) 730-0253<br>(408) 252-0073<br>(408) 735-7244<br>(408) 707-4716<br>(408) 245-7562<br>(408) 668-1319<br>(408) 268-9700<br>(408) 227-3924<br>(415) 152-9420<br>(408) 356-9918<br>(415) 857-1789<br>(408) 912-0675<br>(408) 225-5578<br>(408) 923-6800<br>(408) 244-4484<br>(415) 356-7435<br>(415) 855-0597<br>(408) 928-6536<br>(415) 327-1115<br>(415) 540-8978 |

=== PAGE 4 ===
# Directory Listing

## D Section

**Dey** - Brian & Maria, 1475 Koch LN, San Jose, CA 95125, (408) 266-6690

**Degraaf** - Bruce & Maria, 1120 Point Dunes Ct., San Jose, CA 95139, (408) 257-6658

**Delaney** - George, 714 Willow Glen Way, San Jose, CA 95125, (408) 296-8859

**Delaney** - John, 2410 Woodland Ave, San Jose, CA 95128, 792-9206

**Dellings** - William, 5271 Dupont Ave., Newark, CA 94560, ______

**Delsie** - Marjorie, 1100 S. Villa Dr., San Ramon, CA 95900, ______

**Dickinson** - Daniel B., 1128 Alliston CT, San Jose, CA 95120, (408) 269-5793

**Dolan** - Gary, 1476 Lewis Ln 11F, Santa Clara, CA 95050, (408) 244-4415

**Dondas** - Mary, 2478 San Martin Dr., Santa Clara, CA 95050, (408) 262-1209

**Dunn** - Paul F., 301 Tradewinds DR, #4, San Jose, CA 95123, (408) 226-3638

**Duncan** - Owen, 4980 Radeco Blvd, Pasaden, CA 95133, ______

**Duran** - Steven, 9000 Ventura, Half Moon Bay, 94019, (408) 728-2866

**Edwards** - Gregory, 41 Ventura, San Jose, CA 94015, (408) 965-7122

**Edwards** - Mathew, 1566 Fairview, San Jose, CA 95130, (408) 374-5831

**Elsuits** - James, 13633 Treeview Trail, Los Gatos, CA 95030, (408) 358-1933

**Ferrier** - Herman, 1709 Bellow Oaks Dr., San Jose, CA 95036, (408) 608-5449

**Felice** - David D., P.O. Box 5734, San Jose, CA 95150, (408) 723-8000

**Foth** - Bob, 340 Rio Verde Pl. #4, Milpitas, CA 95035, (408) 263-4455

**Fincetus** - Sam, 1640 Robert Dr., San Jose, CA 95023, (408) 225-7514

**Franziol** - Andy, 1290-24th Ave., San Francisco, 94122, (415) 661-0660

**Frank** - Bruce E., 4668 Mossbrook Cir., San Jose, CA 95130, (408) 866-6488

**Frazier** - Thomas B., 6858 Port Dr., San Jose, CA 95120, (408) 268-1614

**Fraizol** - Richard, 623 Glenn Way, San Jose, CA 95127, (408) 259-0145

**Freeman** - Alex, P.O. Box 6015*, Palo Alto, CA, ______, (415) 321-3150

**Freemames** - Rick, P.O. Box 6016*, Palo Alto, CA 19306, ______

**Funk** - Clarence, 5790 E. Tarpey Dr., Fresno, CA 93727, (408) 245-0802

**Gilroy** - Kenneth H., 146 Mountain, San Jose, CA 94060, (408) 268-7367

**Gleason** - William, 1418 Logan Ave., Newark, CA 94560, (415) 790-9250

**Gleason** - John P., 5361 Fort Saliwood Dr., Newark, CA 94500, (408) 248-1154

**Gomez** - Daniel, 1111 Park Colony Cir., San Jose, CA 95060, ______

**Goodrich** - Daniel, 1123 Villan ST, Mt. View, CA 94040, (415) 524-0678

**Gottlieb** - Steven, 155 San Carlos Rd., El Cerrito, CA 95030, (408) 379-8177

**Gottlieb** - Jonathan, 58 #70 Santa Hill Rd., Cupertino, CA 94024, (415) 969-7028

**Grandall** - Richard, 5624 Rudy Dr., San Jose, CA 95124, (408) 269-7028

**Greenberg** - Dave, 422 Conccord Dr., Menlo Park, CA 94025, (415) 322-5080

**Greenberg** - Gary, 12 Stoney Loop, Lincome, CA 94550, (415) 847-6638

**Gudds** - Andrew, 10310 Broadview Dr., San Jose, CA 95127, (408) 272-7475

**Gulino** - Joseph Arriana, 5405 Entrada Cedros, San Jose, CA 95123, ______

**Halback** - Walter M., 118 E. Selma, San Jose, CA 95126, (408) 998-0661

**Hansen** - Ronald L., 1094 Miguelita Rd., San Jose, CA 95127, (408) 258-0449

**Harmagel** - Gary, 1106 Allinston Way, San Jose, CA 95120, (408) 997-7657

=== PAGE 5 ===
# Directory Listing

| Name | Address | ID | Phone |
|------|---------|----|----|---|
| Harrell Jr.John A. | 828 8 Cado Valley Dr. #2 | San Jose, CA. 95117 | (408) 997-0434 |
| Herschkowitcz Jr.John A. | 1255 Lido Valley Dr. | San Jose, CA. 95130 | (408) 730-9781 |
| Hethoat Gary D. | 1559 Wolfe Rd. | Sunnyvale, CA. 94087 | |
| Hofgard Fred C. | 1531 Glenview Dr. | Sunnyvale, CA. 94086 | |
| Hogg Frederick | 6096 Alemendra Ct. | San Jose, CA. 95120 | 913?-0816 |
| Horne Jeff | 5051 Longford Rd. | San Jose, CA. 95129 | 268-4721 |
| Horton Eugene | 1509 Los Padres Blvd. | Santa Clara, CA. 95050 | 287-9312 |
| Howell Jerry | 1489 San Marcos Dr. | San Jose, CA. 95132 | 854-7598 |
| Johnson Bryan A. | 2260 Algoa Dr. | San Jose, CA. 95125 | 927-0705 |
| Johnson Henry V. | 3858 Keith Way | Menlo Park, CA. 94025 | 854-3595 |
| Jones Gerald L. | 1014 Karine Ct. | Sunnyvale, CA. 94086 | 732-1597 |
| Jones Dennis | #13 Guilford Gardens Mosten | Sunnyvale, CA. 94087 | |
| Josey Ronnie K. | 490 S.Abbott Ave. #A4 | Manchester, England M109QM | 297-9330 |
| Kinney Edward | 22408 Balsarol CT. | Cupertino, CA. 95014 | |
| Kissinger Steven M. | 1575 Tenaka Pl K-5 | San Jose, CA. 94087 | 739-0816 |
| Klausner David | 1671 Marblehead Way #404 | Sunnyvale, CA. 95125 | 267-8045 |
| Klein Fred | 1224 Magdalena | Los Altos, CA. 94022 | 948-8398 |
| Kuhlman Howard | 310 Duane Ct. | San Jose, CA. 95136 | 265-2348 |
| Letchman George | 891 Opal Circle | Milpitas, CA. 95035 | 262-8762 |
| Lettner Harry O. | 425 Hazelwood Dr. | So. San Francisco 94080(415) | 583-4444 |
| Lichtman James E. | 5683 Laguna Seca Way | San Jose, CA. 95130 | 297-8403 |
| Liebmann John L. | 7880 Portofino Way | San Jose, CA. 94080 | 997-4653 |
| Loag Aloysus | 344 2nd Lane Ct. | So. San Francisco | 952-6660 |
| Looney Aloysius | 1326 Meridian Ave. | Sebastopol, CA. 95472 | 867-1264 |
| Lundy Robert | 6158 White Rd. | San Jose, CA. | |
| Machholz Don & Laura | 5234 Camden Ave. | San Jose, CA. 95124 | 448-8707 |
| MacPherson Charles E. | 1552 Marybelle Dr. | San Jose, CA. 95020 | 296-7061 |
| Malm Robert | 299 Lanyon Ave. | Los Altos, CA. 94022 | 941-1343 |
| Mancuso Paul | 1665 Arizona Ave. | Milpitas, CA. 95035 | 946-0738 |
| Mancuso Steve | 235 N.Monroe Street | San Jose, CA. | 225-7930 |
| Mangan Roland | 2420 Pacific Dr. #145 | Santa Clara, CA. 95060 | 984-0628 |
| Manly Peter L. | 1533 W 7th Street | Tempe, Az 85281 | 966-8920 |
| Marconi Jack | 849 Autumn Lane | San Jose, CA. 95129 | 446-2970 |
| Marlowe Marshall B. | 13268 Via Ranchero Ct. | Saratoga, CA. 95070 | 867-1569 |
| Marrotte Gary | 3063 Mathlnven LN | San Jose, CA. 95121 | |
| Massey Ronnie | 1343 Centre Pointe Dr #1007 | San Jose, CA. 95049 | 238-0523 |
| McBride Doug | 1576 Halibeck Ave. #7 | Sunnyvale, CA. 94087 | |
| McGee Lloyd H. | 68 Boardland Terrace | Sunnyvale, CA. 94085 | 749-8609 |
| McMahon James E. | P.O. Box 2331 | Livermore, CA. 94255 | |
| Medlock Kevin & Denni | 1502% Broadway West | Oakland, CA. 94611 | 654-7796 |
| Melton Gerald | 5534 El Nino Ct. UCSC | San Jose, CA. 95064 | |
| Meiz Joseph | 150 Milmar Way | Los Gatos, CA. 95030 | (408) 904-8100 |

=== PAGE 6 ===
# Directory Listing

| Name | Address | Location | Phone |
|------|---------|----------|-------|
| Miller | Bob | 3060 Dryden Ave. | Gilroy, CA. 95020 | (408) 926-7377 |
| Milligan | David | 987 Shadow Brook Dr. | San Jose, CA. 95120 | (408) 251-8419 |
| Milne | Dan | 624 Shadowhill Way | San Jose, CA. 95113 | (415) 797-9916 |
| Minda | Rita | 766 Hazard Pl. #L | Newark, CA. 94560 | (408) 255-7030 |
| Molinari | John | 8146 Park Villa Cl. | Cupertino, CA. 95014 | (408) 198-4166 |
| Molnar | Barbara | 539 Oakmont Dr. | San Jose, CA. 95127 | (408) 225-7162 |
| Moshier | Richard G. | 632 Iroquois CT | San Jose, CA. 95123 | (408) 269-1097 |
| Mund | Bruce | 1766 Comstock LN | San Jose, CA. 95124 | |
| Munoz | Antonio | 2233 Rock ST | San Jose, CA. 95122 | |
| Naffarrate | | 1060 Terra Nobel Way | San Jose, CA. 95132 | (408) 251-6816 |
| Nalcheff | Mitchell | 890 Rose CT | Campbell, CA. 95008 | (408) 996-8248 |
| Nibbio | Norman | 6 Fuchsia Ave. #L | Sunnyvale, CA. 95087 | (408) 749-1196 |
| Olson | Charles | 2082 Greenleaf Dr. | Cupertino, CA. 95014 | (408) 446-3450 |
| Page | Richard | 1482 Farnbridge Dr. | San Jose, CA. 95124 | (408) 377-1092 |
| Parker | Ralph | 2450 Paseo Robles Ave. | San Jose, CA. 95032 | (408) 246-5678 |
| Parker | Jack & Pat | 2600 Sente Rd. #3 | Santa Clara, CA. 95051 | (408) 286-1343 |
| Parlette | Larry | 1770 Moorpark St. Ave. | Santa Clara, CA. 95051 | |
| Peeler | Ralph | 75 W. Monroe St. | Milpitas, CA. 95111 | (408) 241-0663 |
| Pecora | | E P.O. Box 2426 #124 | Saratoga, CA. 95944 | |
| Perez | | 1027 Morrison St. | San Jose, CA. 95070 | |
| Peterson | Jack | 1640 Yosemite Dr. | San Jose, CA. 93134 | (408) 262-1457 |
| Pinkl | Ernest W. | 335 Longfellow Way | Milpitas, CA. 95035 | (408) 252-5609 |
| Pinkl | | 192 Montalvo #A | San Jose, CA. 93110 | |
| Poulos | Darwin | 5353 Innaen Res. | San Jose, CA. 95129 | (408) 252-2105 |
| Prato | Chris & Shea | 474 Salad Dr. LZ01 | San Jose, CA. 95123 | (408) 629-2994 |
| Pryor | Chuck P. | 1330 Nijar Ct. | San Jose, CA. 95111 | (408) 972-0194 |
| Pyc | Emile | 1510 Van Dusen IN. | Campbell, CA. 95008 | (408) 378-5832 |
| Quinton | | 4155 Rosenbaum Ave. | San Jose, CA. 95116 | (408) 629-7814 |
| Ramos | Richard D. | 105 Jodi Ln. | San Jose, CA. 95129 | |
| Rattley | | 5 South Pueblo ST. | Gilbert, AZ. 85234 | (602) 964-6747 |
| Reals | John | 4303 Barham Ave. | Redwood, CA. 94061 | |
| Rhodes | Gary & Jackie | 1833 Redwood Ave. | Vancouver, WA. 98664 | (415) 366-6705 |
| Rice | Thomas | 1029 Mcabee PL. | Redwood City, CA. 94012 | (408) 251-4524 |
| Rivera Jr. | Donald | 3398 Creighton PL. | San Jose, CA. 95052 | |
| Rosing | Phyllis | 6207 1 Nth. Stge Rd. | Santa Clara, CA. 95051 | (408) 293-0611 |
| Rossett | Marvin-Anne | 1807 Fair Oaks Ridge Rd. | Los Gatos, CA. 95110 | (408) 354-2307 |
| Rothing | James P. | 5964 Garces Ave. | San Jose, CA. 95123 | (408) 578-4768 |
| Ruano | Robert | 1001 Souix CT | Fremont, CA. 94539 | (415) 791-2706 |
| Rush | Maria F. | 1334 Bellemy Dr. | Sunnyvale, CA. 95011 | |
| Schneer | David & Joy | 1352 Kingfisher Way #31 | Sunnyvale, CA. 94087 | |
| Sanford | John | 2215 Martha Ave. | Orange, CA. 92667 | |

=== PAGE 7 ===
# Directory Listings

## S Section

**Schell** Ed P.O. Box 1345 2419 Cupertino Rd. Los Gatos, CA 95030 356-7498 (408)

**Schiffman** Mary Appt C-125 344 Westblue Dr. Cupertino, CA 95015 446-4265 (408)

**Schember** Walt P.O. Box 6 Sunnyvale SP Los Altos, CA 94022 533-9431 (415)

**Schiend** Irene 522 Iris Dr. Santa Clara, CA 95050 322-5377 (415)

**Seefried** Ronald 967-6049 Rt 29 Box 408 La Honda, CA 94020 851-3493 (415)

**Segui** Raul Seaside Inc., La Honda, CA 94018 851-7923 (415)

**Specker** Robert R. 220 Monroe St. #1404 Santa Clara, CA 95050 547-6523 (415)

**Skeolone** Thomas D. Ann Darling Dr. Moraga, CA 94556 231-3808 (408)

**Stevens** Diana 492 Azalea Dr. San Jose, CA 95129 257-0947 (408)

**Stone** Donald 731 Camino Ricardo Moraga, CA 94556 376-3007 (415)

**Stone** Joseph B-208 3915 Seven Trees Blvd. San Jose, CA 95111 244-6693 (408)

**Stutis** Carl 5916 Orchard Ave. San Jose, CA 95111 226-5530 (408)

**Takahashi** Allen 5916 Orchard Ave. Richmond, CA 94804 235-9513 (415)

**Tanner** Ave 1037 Raritan Dr. San Jose, CA 94039 246-3056 (408)

**Theimer** Eva 948 Beach Dr. Cupertino, CA 95014 212-0125 (408)

**Trejo** Paul 1120 Stevens Creek Blvd. San Jose, CA 95014 371-1307 (408)

**Van Nuland** James 885 Laverne Ave. Los Altos, CA 95022

**Vanzandt** Donald E. 168 Waverly #7 Palo Alto, CA 94301 327-3158 (415)

**Valient** Maurice R. 991 Melandra Ave. San Jose, CA 95120 274-1621 (415)

**Wallace** Donald G. 387 Hedge Rd. Menlo Park, CA 94025 395-4166 (415)

**Walton** Ron 1670 Via Rancho San Lorenzo, CA 94580 278-3335 (415)

**Walts** Larry 1668 Piedmont Ave. Hayward, CA 94545 786-2977 (415)

**Webster** Larry 5299 Elrose Ave. San Jose, CA 95124 267-4133 (408)

**Weinberg** Edward L. 365 N Dixon Dr. Campbell, CA 95008 629-3712 (408)

**Weinstein** Mike J. P.O. Box 1528 San Jose, CA 95109 377-6610 (408)

**Welch** J.D. 9651 Campbell, CA 95009 243-1822 (408)

**Wells** Herman Box 9651 Single Blossom Dr. Cupertino, CA 95014 252-5301 (408)

**Williams** Dale W. 3306) Lrk. Wawasee SP Fremont, CA 94536 252-1966 (415)

**Witkowski** Jim 819 Hogan Dr. Santa Clara, CA 95050 471-4852 (415)

**Woodcock** David O. 800 Rockwood Dr. San Jose, CA 95128

**Zaiders** Jack 296N #3 Magellocce Dr. San Jose, CA 95128 947-7573 (408)

**Zimmer** Jerry W. 2120 Claremont Dr. Saratoga, CA 95070 246-6199 (408) 867-1770 (408)

## New Members and Late Renewals

**Belleville** Logan M. 1321 NE. Salmon Creek Ave. Van Gatos, CA 98665 997-2657 (408)

**Lambson** Dave W. 1041 Main Dr. San Jose, CA 95124 292-8977 (408)

**Pura** Dave 494 Irving Ave. San Jose, CA 95128 629-8146 (408)

**Rappaport** Fred 236 Manley Ct.

=== PAGE 8 ===
# THE SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION'S

# 5TH ANNUAL

# ASTRONOMICAL AUCTION

## SATURDAY MAY 4
## 6:00 PM
## DOORS WILL OPEN AT 2:00 PM

THE LOS GATOS RED CROSS BUILDING
16011 Los Gatos Saratoga Road

TELESCOPES, EYEPIECES, MOUNTINGS, MIRRORS, LENSES, CLOCK DRIVES, BOOKS, CAMERA EQUIPMENT, STAR CHARTS, FINDERS, TUBES, DIAGONALS, PHOTOGRAPHS, SPACE ART - everything you need to make your hobby more enjoyable. You name it - it's likely to be there. Check your garage and closets for anything astronomical you would like to sell. Complete the pre-registration information form on back and save time and trouble. Anyone can buy and sell! It's easy and it's easy!

SEE YOU AT ONE OF THE BIGGEST AND MOST FUN ASTRONOMICAL EVENTS IN THE BAY AREA!

=== PAGE 9 ===
# PRE-REGISTRATION INFORMATION

The 5th Annual Bay Area Astronomical Auction is approaching so now is the time to start looking around for those items not earning their space, or brought back from Riverside, or whatever is astronomical or telescope-making related that you would like to earn some $$ from.

Pre-registration by mail makes it easy. Fill out the form or a copy of it. List each different item you have. If you have several identical items, use a single line and put in the quantity. Give a minimum price, even if you are willing to let it go really cheap. Indicate the percentage of the selling price to go to the SJAA (minimum 10%). If you didn't pay much for it anyway you may wish to make it an outright donation. Thank you. All proceeds from the auction go to further public education in astronomy.

Next, and MOST important, mail the form, with a SASE, to Jim van Nuland, 3509 Calico Ave, San Jose, CA. 95124. You might keep a copy of it, too. Jim will sign your bidder/seller and item numbers, and will get the form back to you quickly. That's a promise.

You will then have the numbers to label everything before the day of the auction. Use stickers given to idicate the item number, at least. If you have large stickers sent back, include the minimum bid, too. It helps the auctioneer work smoother.

If you find another box of things, just send in another form. Include the bidder number from the first one. If you find more of something you'd already registered, give the number of the first, indicate the number to be added, and give the same description.

If you don't include the SASE, Jim will assign the numbers and hold the form. You can pick it up when you arrive at the auction and then get busy labeling your goodies then.

In any case, Jim will have all the stuff hammered into the computer before auction day, so there will be no backlog and, for those who pre-register, no delays. Priority on auction day will be given to assigning bidder numbers, ---item registration will be done as time permits. So get the forms to Jim.

Directions to the auction:

Take Hwy 17 south towards Santa Cruz. Take the Highway 9 (Los Gatos-Saratoga Rd) exit and continue onto Los Gatos-Saratoga Rd. Travel about a mile to Rose Avenue and turn right. Turn right immediately into the Red Cross buildings parking lot. (16011 Los Gatos-Saratoga Rd). Plenty of parking and easy loading and unloading access!

Doors open at 2 PM for registration of items and bidders. There will be no item registration past 5:45 PM. Auction starts promptly at 6 PM. Items may be paid by cash or check. There will be a $1 bidder/seller registration fee at the door. Refreshments will be available!

---

## 1985 SJAA Auction Pre-Registration

| Bidder # | Name | | | Club |
|----------|------|---|---|------|
| | Addr | | | City | Zip |

| Item NUM | Qty | Min bid | SJAA % | Description (about 40-50 characters or so...) |
|----------|-----|---------|--------|-----------------------------------------------|
| | | | | |
| | | | | |
| | | | | |
| | | | | |
| | | | | |
| | | | | |

=== PAGE 10 ===
# COMET COMMENTS
## BY: DON MACHHOLZ

No new comets have been discovered, nor
returning comets recovered during the past
month. This leaves the current tally at 13.
Levy-Rudenko is now in the evening northern
sky and Comet Shoemaker (1984f), discovered
nine months ago, is finally brightening in the
morning sky.

Two fainter comets are visible too:
Periodic Comets Tschuchinshan (1984e) and
Schaumasse (1984m). They are growing dimmer
at roughly magnitude 11, call me if you want
positions for them.

As mentioned in December 1984 of this
column, the [Past Discoveries] installments of
1982 and 1983 have been bound [corrected,
added] and [tripled in size], and would appear
in booklet form soon. This is now available
from me, the cost is $8.00, ppd. (Without
postage it's $7.00) It runs 115 pages and
covers comets discovered by amateur
astronomers between 1975 and 1984.

## DATE R.A. (1950) DEC. ELONG. MAG.

### Comet Levy-Rudenko (1984t)

| DATE | R.A. | DEC. | ELONG. | MAG. |
|------|------|------|---------|------|
| 02-24 | 03h 03.2m | +59°16' | 125° | 9.8 |
| 03-01 | 08h 40.3m | +51°43' | 129° | 10.1 |
| 03-06 | 08h 28.1m | +45°03' | 129° | 10.5 |
| 03-11 | 08h 20.3m | +39°22' | 126° | 10.9 |
| 03-16 | 08h 17.0m | +34°36' | 123° | 11.3 |
| 03-21 | 08h 15.3m | +30°36' | 119° | 11.6 |
| 03-26 | 08h 15.0m | +27°15' | 115° | 12.0 |
| 03-31 | 08h 15.2m | +24°23' | 111° | 12.3 |
| 04-05 | 08h 17.5m | +21°56' | 107° | 12.7 |

This comet is pulling away
from the sun (1.6 to 2.0
AU this month) and from the
earth (0.8 to 1.4 AU). It
may be slightly brighter than
indicated. This will be our
last chance to see this comet.

### Comet Shoemaker (1984f)

| DATE | R.A. | DEC. | ELONG. | MAG. |
|------|------|------|---------|------|
| 02-24 | 16h 08.8m | -24°05' | 90° | 11.8 |
| 04-06 | 16h 03.1m | -26°08' | 101° | 11.5 |
| 03-16 | 15h 53.4m | -28°24' | 112° | 11.3 |
| 03-26 | 15h 38.8m | -30°50' | 124° | 11.0 |
| 04-05 | 15h 18.2m | -33°18' | 137° | 10.8 |

This comet is 3.2 AU from the
sun and 2.7 AU from the earth
at mid-month. It moves from
near M 80 through S. Libra. It
should brighten to mag 10.3 in
May as it moves further south.

## WHAT GOES AROUND COMES AROUND

This month we'll cover several aspects of
Halley's comet. It is slowly brightening in
the evening sky as it continues to move
towards earth and the sun, pulling away
from it. These distances are listed below in
millions of miles. The comet will be
equidistant from the earth and sun on March
11.

The comet remains near the border of
Orion and Taurus, and since the it until late
July. It will move only about 2 degrees all
month.

| DATE | R.A. (1950) | DEC. | DIS. TO SUN AND EARTH |
|------|-------------|------|-----------------------|
| 02-24 | 04h 58.2m | +13°24.2' | 443.9 | 418.9 |
| 03-01 | 04h 56.8m | +13°35.4' | 439.4 | 422.7 |
| 03-06 | 04h 54.2m | +13°47.6' | 434.9 | 426.6 |
| 03-11 | 04h 52.9m | +14°01.0' | 430.4 | 430.5 |
| 03-16 | 04h 51.8m | +14°15.8' | 425.8 | 434.3 |
| 03-21 | 04h 51.3m | +14°23.8' | 422.0 | 438.0 |
| 03-26 | 04h 51.1m | +14°36.6' | 416.6 | 441.5 |
| 03-31 | 04h 51.2m | +14°49.4' | 412.0 | 444.6 |
| 04-05 | 04h 51.6m | +15°02.4' | 407.3 | 447.4 |

As for its brightness, some sources state
that it should be 18th magnitude by mid-month.
This implies a fully-active comet (of use, of
course, only to professionals), whereas for
the comet to be quite small, about 25 seconds
of arc across, with the coma reflecting more
light than it is emitting. Estimates in early
Feb. place it at roughly magnitude 20, but
this varies by about 2 magnitudes over a
period of roughly a day. This variability may
be due in part to unpredictable intrinsic
comet behavior we don't yet understand as
the dust grains in the coma will brighten
tremendously when becoming mag. 13 by this
August. By then Halley's Comet will be in our
morning sky and visible in amateurs' scopes.

For those of you who require specifics
for comet ephemerides, here are the orbital
elements for Halley's comet from IAU Cir.
3787, determined by D. Yeomans.

Peri date: 1986 Feb 09.44394  
Arg. of Peri: 111.84804 deg  
Long. Ascn node: 58.14397 deg  
Aphelion (a): 17.94104 AU  
Peri Dis (q): 0.587l045 AU.  
Ascending node: 58.14538 deg.  
Eccen.: 0.9672759

For magnitude, Norris and Bortle suggest:

Abso1. Mag. 3.1, "n"=3.1

It is not too late to become involved in
gathering data on Halley's Comet for use in a
world-wide study. International Halley Watch
can be reached at:

Steve Edberg  
Jet Propulsion Laboratory  
Calif. Institute of Technology  
4800 Oak Grove Drive  
T1166 B4  
Pasadena, CA. 91109

Some additional sources of information
are available for those interested in comets.
Each serve a different purpose, all are quite
useful.

The INTERNATIONAL COMET QUARTERLY is
published four times a year and contains new
observations, articles and ephemerides. It is
yours for $8.00 a year (payable to
INTERNATIONAL COMET QUARTERLY) from:

Daniel Green  
Smithsonian Observatory  
60 Garden St.  
Cambridge, Mass. 02138

The International Astronomical Union
issues about 80 circulars each year. These
transmit data on comets, asteroids, novae, and
deep space astronomy. They cost $30.00/100
issues (payable to: Central Bureau for
Astronomical Telegrams") and you can get them
from:

Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams  
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory  
Cambridge, Mass. 02138

Then there's the "Comet News Service", a
quarterly newsletters with interesting reports
about new comets and articles on comets in
general. You can get this for $5.00/yr.
[Payable to "Comet News Service"] from:

Comet News Service  
P.O. Box TDR, No. 92  
Truckee, Calif. 95734

=== PAGE 11 ===
# SPACE PROGRAM UPDATE
## BY: BOB FINGERHUT

### SHUTTLE MISSION 51-C DELAYED
After one month's delay, due to an ice buildup on the external tank, Discovery was launched on Jan 23. After launch of its Department of Defense payload, it returned to land at the Kennedy Space Center on Jan 27. The IUS, which was used to boost the payload, was said to have performed well.

### SHUTTLE MISSION 51-E DELAYED TO MARCH 3
The mission has been delayed to allow additional time for replacement of thermal insulation tiles. The tiles were removed for repair of the screws, which is used to smooth the surface of the tiles. Earlier, the tiles on United States Senator Jake Garn will be aboard United States as a payload specialist and will participate in studies of space sickness and the shuttle toys, physics education demonstration. Also aboard will be the record, Tracking and Data Relay satellite and the Telesat-I communications satellite.

### SHUTTLE ORBITER FLEET TO GROW
The orbiter, Atlantis, is scheduled for delivery to Kennedy Space Center, in April. The orbiter Columbia is being updated and will be returned in early July.

### DISCOVERY SCHEDULED FOR ANOTHER LAUNCH MARCH 19
The mission, 51-D, is to deploy the Syncom iv-3 communications satellite and retrieval of the Long Duration Exposure Facility.

### JAPANESE HALLY MISSION LAUNCHED
US-15 was launched toward Halley's comet on Jan 8th. Its purpose was to test the new Nissan Motors Mu-3sii launch vehicle. It will encounter the solar wind and interplanetary magnetic field, at a distance of 16.5 million Halley's comet. The primary Japanese Halley spacecraft, Planet-A, will be launched on the same type of booster on August 14, 1985.

### EUROPEAN NATIONS APPROVE 10 YEAR SPACE PROGRAM
The program includes development of a heavy lift Ariane launcher and participating in the U.S. air/space station. The heavy lift booster, Ariane 5, will use the HM60, large cryogenic engine which ESA is developing. ESA's contribution to the U.S. space station will be to furnish the modules to the station with, but separate from the station. The Hermes mini-shuttle was not approved, but the French were told to keep ESA informed of progress so that it could be approved as soon as it is feasible.

### EXTREME ULTRAVIOLET EXPLORER SATELLITE INITIATED
NASA began this project last August. Its objective is to develop the first all-sky map in the extreme ultraviolet band of the electromagnetic spectrum.

### NASA BUDGET SENT TO CONGRESS
The budget request includes money for development of a Mars Geoscience/ Climatology Orbiter and a new start for an Orbital Transfer Vehicle. The Mars mission would be launched in 1990.

---

**SJAA EPHEMERIS**  
**3509 CALICO AVE**  
**SAN JOSE,CA 05124**

**BULK RATE**  
**U.S. POSTAGE PAID**  
**PERMIT NO. 5381**  
**SAN JOSE, CA. 95125**

---

**TIME VALUE-DATED**  
**NEWS MATERIAL**