=== PAGE 1 ===
# SJAA EPHEMERIS

**VOLUME 3 NUMBER 1 OFFICIAL PUBLICATION OF THE SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION JANUARY, 1992**

## January Speaker
**Del Johnson**

Our January speaker will be Ethan Wilson Cliffton, AIA. Mr. Cliffton has graciously accepted this opportunity to tell us about himself and how he may provide direction and purpose in developing a design for our observatory. Since 1985, the architectural firm of Ethan Wilson Cliffton, AIAA has acted as a catalyst for planning and design teams which effectively and affordably address projects of complex scope, such as the Hailey Hill Observatory. As a full service firm with a fluency of the sciences, his problem solving approach is based on experience in containment, thermal, vibration and radiation isolation, materials handling, and aerodynamics. Ongoing astronomical observatory projects keep the firm abreast of the most recent findings in mirror technology, seeing, infrared signatures and the internal and external aerodynamics of observatories and buildings.

Ethan Cliffton brings to his designs a depth of technical knowledge gained in more than seventeen years of experience. He has participated in studies for the NASA Space Station and Mars mission. With MBT ASSOCIATES Ethan was project Manager for a research complex at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. The complex consists of a silo housing the worlds most powerful electron microscope, the Atomic Resolution Microscope, and the Surface Science and Catalysis Laboratory. Concurrently he was Assistant Project Manager for the Keck Observatory, to house the world's largest telescope. Unique meteorology, including 150-MPH winds and savage ice storms, required special attention to operating systems, entry, and protection of the telescope. Subsystems

---

**January 4:** Star party at Grant Ranch with Halls Valley Group. Annular Solar Eclipse - Southern California

**January 10:** Public star party at Branham Lane Park.

**January 11** 8:00 P.M. General Meeting at Milpitas Library. Board of Directors meet at 6:30 P.M. preceeding the program.

**January 18:** Beginning Astronomy class. 8:00 P.M. at Milpitas Library.

**January 25:** Star party at Fremont Peak State Park.

**February 1:** Star party at Grant Ranch with Halls Valley Group.

**February 8:** 8:00 P.M. General Meeting at Milpitas Library. Board of Directors meet at 6:30 P.M. preceeding the program.

**February 14:** (Friday) Public star party at Branham Lane Park.

**February 15:** Beginning Astronomy class. 8:00 P.M. at Milpitas Library.

---

for mirror and instrument module handling, and oxygenation of workspaces at the 14,000 foot elevation were special requirements of the design.

World wide travel has enhanced his professional development. Continued study maintains fluency in the sciences, while lectures and special teaching assignments communicates his skills and experience to other professionals, and to young people just beginning the long road to a technological future.

As you can see we have a wonderful opportunity to learn first hand what will be developing in the SJAA observatory project.

## FROM YOUR EDITOR

We begin the new year with several months of preparing your news letter behind us . I never have understood what Volume and IssueNo. meant or how it was used (and I know some of you will take the time to enlighten me), but I have decided to call each year a Volume and each Month a No. If that is unsatisfactory I'll listen to your ideas, but they better be good! Enough clowning. I'll continue to plea for articles. Maybe some one with great artistical skill similar to Jack Z's can help drawing a map to our observing sites. Hey! If anyone has locations they wish to share, I'll help to publish them. Perhaps a new survey of some of the sites Don Machholtz and Rich Page did years ago will be desired. Several groups could perform this.

Notice on page 3, we are starting a talk by C. Tombaugh. This will be continued until done, be one or two pages in length so it can be copied and placed in a standard note book.

**Remember this months meeting change to the Milpitas Library!**

---

**Officers • Pres. Jack Zeiders • Vice Pres. Paul Mancuso • Tres. Jack Peterson • Sec. Jim Van Nuland • Editors Bob Madden and Paul Barton**

=== PAGE 2 ===
# WHAT'S IN A DOME
**Del Jonson**

Recently I asked for SJAA input concerning the design features of the Halley Hill Dome. As You may recall, the dome is to be designed in a manner which would permit site-independent use and could be built by amateur astronomers with reasonable skills (and at a reasonable cost). The dome, to be designed by a SJAA team led by Ethan Clifton, will be not only built for the Halley Hill site, but will be made available to amateurs every where.

The question at this time is: "What features should be included in the design?"

The following has been suggested:

1. The non-rotating base of the dome shall have AC and/or DC power.
2. The base of the dome (which includes the door) can vary in height.
3. Provisions for holding eyepieces/filters (wall mounted rack?).
4. Fold-down chart/writing area with built-in red and white light.
5. Fold-down bench.
6. Flush door sill (with red safety lights?).
7. Option of manual or powered dome rotation.
8. Independent pier.
9. Internal dome rotation locks.
10. Sized to accommodate a 12.5", f6 Newtonian.

What has been overlooked? Call me, Del Johnson, at (408) 448-0239 and give me your suggestions.

## Henry Coe State Park Star Party
**Paul Barton**

The wind storm of the previous 2-3 days had swept out the smog clearing the skies nicely. The ranger had put a lock on the gate for SJAA, but several people bypassed it so Allen Nelms had to call on the ranger again to get in. Once there the site was clear and ready, but a bit windy, and the sky looked good. I kept thinking the wind will die down by 9-10 P.M. (yes, Santa will be here as usual, too).

By dusk there were five hopeful star gazers set up and ready to go. Around 5 P.M. I started putting on my cold weather gear. It was windy enough to blow dust in your eyes, however the sky continued to look good. The wind continued and by 10 P.M. it was gusting to 25 MPH or so and mostly out of the southwest. Dirt was flying through the air and some mirror covers were put back on. One Four Seasons flap book (Orion $13) was blown away. When it was recovered there was one less page.

One picnic basket was hauled down the hill (against the wind) and eviscerated by bandits wearing masks. Lady was asleep in her nice warm bed. Rich Neueschafer saw a bandit (racoon) up close, but neither bothered the other.

Around midnight the sky was so churned up one couldn't see much. The Trapazium would go in and out of focus during a 5-10 second period. One could only see 3 or 4 stars in the Trapazium. Jim Van Nuland left around midnight (it was that bad). The first time Jim has left that early in 10 years.

All in all it was a pleasant windy workout. I'll bet the next time Jim Baggot and Alicia and Bob will bring more polar expedition gear!

Attendees were asked: What are your objectives tonight?

Jim Van Nuland
    M42 region.

Jim Baggot, Alicia, Bob
    M42, M31, Galaxies as many as can be found, Comet.

Alan Nelms
    General observing, galaxies, nebula, clusters.

Rich Neuschafer
    Jupiter and galaxies tonight.

Paul Barton
    Deep sky objects.

---

# Celestial Calendar

## Lunar Phases Date Rise Tran Set
- NM 15:11hr 04-01 0716 1158 1704
- FQ 18:33hr 12-01 1106 1756 0042
- FM 13:30hr 19-01 1731 0002 0706
- LQ 07:28hr 26-01 0038 0609 1103

## Nearer Planets
Mercury ......... 07-11 0546 1036 1523
1.33 A.U. 17-01 0619 1056 1503
Mag - 0.4 27-01 0642 1116 1546

Venus .......... 07-01 0423 0925 1424
1.20 A.U. 17-01 0439 0935 1427
Mag - 4.0 27-01 0453 0944 1432

Mars ............. 07-01 0609 1050 1527
2.36 A.U. 17-01 0600 1041 1518
Mag + 1.4 27-01 0549 1031 1510

Jupiter ......... 07-01 2125 0350 1014
4.70 A.U. 17-01 2044 0309 0934
Mag - 2.3 27-01 2001 0227 0853

Saturn .......... 07-01 0821 1320 1815
10.3 A.U. 17-01 0745 1245 1741
Mag + 0.6 27-01 0710 1211 1708

SOL Star Type G2V Mag - 26.72
1903 - 2230 ...07-01 0711 1159 1642
1944 - 2100 ...17-01 0707 1200 1649
2032 - 1805 ...27-01 0700 1201 1658

## Astronomical Twilight
JD 2,448,629.5 07-01 0532 - 1820
639.5 17-01 0529 - 1826
649.5 27-01 0524 - 1833

## Sidereal Time
Transit Right 07-01 0000 PST =0657
Ascensionan 17-01 0000 PST =0736
Local Midnight 27-01 0000 PST =0816

**Darkest** Saturday Night ..... Jan 04
Sunset ..................... 1641
Twilight End ............ 1819
Moon Set ............. ... 1704

## TIMES & DATES ARE PACIFIC STANDARD

**by Richard Stanton**

---

**EPHEMERIS** Page 2 **January 1992**

=== PAGE 3 ===
# Dr. Clyde Tombaugh's talk to the EAS
## 1989 March 4

President Roberts, members of the Eastbay Astronomical Society and guests, boys and girls, I appreciate being able to come here tonight to talk to you! — I have a little confession to make to you: for 59 years I've been a Plutocrat! — Most of you know, I imagine, about some of the discoveries of the earlier planets, like Uranus in 1781, Neptune in 1846, and finally Pluto in 1930. It seems that we got about one planet per century!

In the case of Uranus, it can be seen with the unaided eye, near the limit of vision — and I've seen it several times that way — and there are only about 7000 stars in the sky as bright or brighter than Uranus. Then we get to Neptune, and there are a good many more stars and it's not quite so easy. But, Adams and Leverrier did such a marvelous job in predicting its position in the sky that it wasn't difficult either. In fact for one of them, it was within one degree of where it was predicted, which was a remarkable mathematical achievement. One of the most amusing books I've read was the book about the discovery of Neptune, by Martin Grosser. How many have read it? ... You ought to read it — that is one of the most marvelous books of blunders you ever saw! I was both shocked and amused — at *how not* to do it*, you know.... It is the most entertaining story, and I advise you to read it if you can get it. Well at any rate, Neptune of course can be seen with a ONE-INCH TELESCOPE — it's only of the 8th magnitude; and with Leverrier and Adam's quite accurately predicted place, all they needed to do was to look in the immediate area of the sky, where they found it. Of course, they saw a small disk. It was found by Galle at Berlin in about an hour after they started looking! The amusing thing about this was that both Adams and Leverrier, young mathematical astronomers, COULD NOT GET ANY OF THEIR COUNTRYMEN WITH TELESCOPES TO LOOK FOR IT! This went on for months and months and months. Apparently, it never occurred to them that THEY MIGHT LOOK FOR IT FOR THEMSELVES — I don't under-

stand that! And so finally Galle got it. At any rate, now when we get to Percival Lowell, of course he became interested in this in the early part of the century (there were some others but Percival Lowell had done more study on this than anyone else). Lowell initiated some early searches in this century, photographic, without success. Now when we get to objects as dim as Pluto, or even as "Planet X" — which he thought might be of 13th magnitude — you have a very different problem: you have to pick it out among a GREAT NUMBER OF STARS in the sky. As it turns out there are 15 MILLION STARS IN THE SKY THAT ARE AS BRIGHT OR BRIGHTER THAN PLUTO. So, to pick that out among all those millions, you've got a tough job on your hands! It's like looking for a needle in a haystack, and a BIG haystack at that. I don't know just how many straws there might be in a haystack, but it would probably be a comparable number....

Percival Lowell passed away in 1916. They had just finished a 2-year photographic search, using a 9-inch wide angle camera from Swarthmore College; and they took about 1000 plates with it. THEY MISSED IT ON THE EXAMINATION OF THE PLATES — and after Pluto was found, they went back and they FOUND PLUTO'S IMAGE ON THOSE PLATES! So you see, Pluto's a pretty elusive little fellow! Now to give you an idea of the brightness of Pluto — its light would be equivalent to one candle at a distance of about 200 miles! That's dim!!! And a lot of other astronomers did take a dim view of it...!

Well, at any rate, I was in Kansas at the time; and, uh, I had built my third telescope, a 9-inch and it was of very good quality, and I made sketches of Mars and Jupiter and sent them to Lowell Observatory, and they could check it for accuracy with their current photographs on those dates. Apparently, it impressed them favorably enough that they quickly wrote back, asking a lot of questions and so on, and was I in good physical health and so on. Later I was to find out why they asked that —! So, very shortly I was invited to come to Flagstaff to operate a new photographic telescope; they said if I could come for a 3 months trial — I

stayed 14 years! When I arrived at Flagstaff, Dr. Slipher met me at the depot, and so on; and that was quite a scary situation for me because we got hailed out that summer, no crops — I hired out to Nebertunas Combine — and with that hard-earned money I bought my oneway railroad ticket for 28 hours in the chair-car with not enough money in my pocket for a return ticket. Going a thousand miles from home, not knowing a soul, now that took a little nerve... And as I approached Flagstaff I began to LOSE my nerve! Little did I realize what lay around the corner (for in another year Finding a planet!

And so I was assigned to take these photographs, and then later....First they said "We'll get you to learn to take these photographs, and someone else more experienced will examine them to find the planet". Well they did a little blinking but not much and so I began to wonder what was going on — and finally one day Dr. Slipher came down to my office and said "Uh, we'd like for YOU to blink these plates." I shuddered. Why? Because I knew what was on those plates, all those hundreds of thousands of star images and I'll tell you I thought the job would be terribly difficult and tedious ... and it was! Now I really didn't feel very complimented about that, I felt horrified and overwhelmed with a sense of dread, to have to go through all that mass of stars! Believe me it was overwhelming.

Well, of course as you all know the story, I took the plates in January 23 and 29 and as shown as beautifully on the screen there, the shift of position was the only clue to identifying the new planet. The amount of the shift is inversely proportional to the distance, of course, and so the asteroids move faster than they, and so by knowing the amount of shift I expected to see, when I turned the next field of view in the eyepiece, there I saw the thing going back and forth and knowing the scale of my plates and so on, INSTANTLY I KNEW THAT THE OBJECT WAS BEYOND THE ORBIT OF NEPTUNE! And that was a tremendous thrill— and believe me folks it made my day!!!

**[To be continued next month]**

---

**EPHEMERIS** Page 3 **January 1992**

=== PAGE 4 ===
# Double, Triple, and Multiple Stars
**Pat Donnelly**

I have been just sitting here trying to think of something to write for the January issue of the Ephemeris. I'm sort of running out of ideas. (In fact if anyone has suggestions on potential topics for this column, please let me know.) As I was sitting here considering what I should observe tomorrow night(12/1), I remembered I should observe M-79. M-79 is the only globular cluster in the winter sky. It is in the constellation of Lepus (The Hare) just below Orion. Then two different ideas struck me. This article is one of the ideas.

Lepus, The Hare, is full of wonderful objects, including many multiple stars and M-79. To begin, the three brightest stars are triples. Alpha Leporis has two dim optical companions at separations of 36" and 91". Both stars are magnitude 11. I have seen this triple in a C8. Because of that, I suspect the dim companions may be brighter than magnitude 11. Beta Leporis has one true companion and an optical companion. Both companions are dim at magnitude 11. The closer companion is a true bound member of period 300 - 400 years. It is located a mere 2.5" from the primary. The third component is separated by 64" and is an optical companion. I have not been able to see the close companion. Gamma Leporis is the show piece of the trio. It has two components of magnitudes 3.5 and 6.0 separated by 95". The dimmer component also has a companion of magnitude 11 about 45" from the 6.0 magnitude star. I have seen this triple easily, and I suspect the dim 11th magnitude star is probably brighter than indicated.

Next to Alpha Leporis is h3780 or NGC 2017. It is a multiple star or a small open cluster. It consists of 6 to 8 stars brighter than magnitude 10 and two very close doubles. The brightest star is a close double separated by 0.9". This separation provides a good test of sky conditions. The stars are almost equal in magnitude at 7.3 and 7.8, which should be fairly easy to resolve. One of the other members consists of two magnitude 9 components separated by 1.6". The area is well worth some extended study.

After h3780 hop down to M-79, a lonely but otherwise interesting globular cluster. About 35' from M-79 is h3752, a very nice triple star. h3752 consists of a magnitude 5.5 primary and a magnitude 6.5 secondary at 3.1". There is a third companion of magnitude 9 about 1.0" from the primary. Hover, it is probably only an optical companion. M-79 next to h3752 is approximately 50,000 light years away. Since it is on the outer edge of the galaxy, M-79 would be visible in a 100 inch telescope from the Andromeda Galaxy.

As a closing note, because of the southerly declination of the constellation, try to observe the constellation near the meridian. It may not seem like much, but the few extra degrees in elevation will improve the quality of the object tremendously.

## February Speaker
**Arranged by Bob Garfinkle**

What does raisin bread and the Universe have in common? Come to the February 8th general meeting at the Milpitas Library and find out from our guest speaker Dr. David Schramm. Dr. Schramm is the Louis Block Professor of Physical Sciences at the University of Chicago. He is the co-author of the book, "Shadows of Creation". The book is reviewed in the January 1991 issue of Astronomy magazine by our own Bob Garfinkle. In that review Bob states, "Cosmology is the science of how it all began and where it's going. Like many people, I am fascinated by this subject and couldn't put this book down until I finished it."

Dr. Schramm's talk will cover the latest ideas in cosmology, including the continuing controversy of the "Big Bang" vs the "Steady State Universe". His talk will also cover how the universe might end Billions of years from now in either the "Big Chill" or the "Big Crunch". It all depends on the amount of dark matter we think is out there.

**Remember - In January we will be meeting at the Milpitas Library**

# Grant Ranch Star Party
**Paul Barton**

Saturday, Dec 7th, was overcast early in the day, but indicated clearing with the wind from the North. By mid afternoon the sky was broken and clearing continuing to look hopeful. The sky actually cleared up pretty well by early evening — a few little sheep moving around. Every one had a good outing — stars were twinkling, temp in the 40's and a dry not much wind.

With great difficulty some sharp eyes could see M-1 at magnitude 9.0 with 11"X80 binoculars on a stand. The four stars of the Trapezium could be easily seen with Wolf's 6" Vega. Present in part:

- Chris Kelly 8" f/4 RFI
- Paul Barton 6" Vega
- Bill Dellings 4 1/2" Astro Scan
- Denis Hutson C8
- Craig Anderson 12 1/2" Dob (very fine)
- Del Johnson
- Ron Bricmont
- Stan Webster

Ranger Erica Crawford stopped by for a while. I also heard Tom Anderson off in the dark somewhere, and a couple of others I couldn't identify. It was a good outing.

# Fremont Peak outing
**Paul Barton**

Sunday, Dec 8th, the sky looked good. Sooo-o! actually the sky was very good for these times. On a scale of 1 to 10 the sky was about an 8. Nine or 10 skiers haven't been seen in these parts for years. Present:

- Paul Barton 18" JMI
- Dan and Chris Wright from San Leandro with an out standing 12 1/2" Dob which performed like a good refractor
- John (-------) from Cupertino with a C-90
- At least 2 others

The temperature was in the upper 30's, dry, with not much twinkle. Only 4 stars in the Trapezium. Gama Andromadae (17) split wide open. We thought we could see the cloud of which the Horse Head is a part, but no one had a H-II filter. Excellent outing.

---

**EPHEMERIS**

**Page 4**

**January 1992**

=== PAGE 5 ===
# ASTRO ADS

**ASTRO ADS are free to all noncommercial advertisers wishing to sell astronomically related products or services. Please send your ad directly to the Editor,**

**Bob Madden**
**1616 Inglis Lane**
**San Jose, Ca. 95118**

**NO LATER THAN THE 15TH OF EACH MONTH!** Your Astro Ad will run approximately 3-months.

**CELESTRON 14** complete with fork, drive base, drive corrector, 2-inch diagonal, counter weights. With heavy steel pedestal, three legs, plus wedge. Excellent condition with excellent optics. $7800 takes it! (no eyepieces). You pick up! Contact: John Gleason 415-7928248 1/92

**ULTRA FINDER** A unique 5" f/5 refractor, Jeagers cemented Achromat in a cell, aluminum tube, mounted for 1/4-20 bolts, rack and pinion 2" focuser, dew cap, lens cover, 2" dia. 55mm Plossl (12X) and huge surplus 2" dia. eyepiece (7X @ 2-1/2° field). Has 2-3/4 times the light gathering power of Celestron, Lumicon or Orion 3" Super Finders. Solar Eclipses, the Moon, open clusters and nebulae are spectacular through this optics. Best offer over $550. (Steve is flexible, but since there are $650 worth of parts in here, he doesn't want to take a bath) Steve Greenberg 209-239-2154 (home) or 415-423-4899 (work). 11/91

**COATED TRIPLET OBJECTIVE LENS** f5.6, 40"fl, designed by Dr. James Baker of Harvard Observatory. Dimensioned plans for cell (optional pair of focal length reducer lenses included if you wish an effective back focal length of about 14"). Dr. Baker considered this to be one of his two best color-corrected designs manufactured. Photographic quality and will easily cover a 9" by 9" plate. A few minor scratches on the front element that do not interfere with optical quality. Two minor edge chips (covered by spacer ring) on the rear focal reducer lenses. Best offer around $600. Steve Greenberg 209-239-2154 (home) or 415-423-4899 (work). 11/91

---

**Joe Perry,** a former member of the SJAA, announces the availability of CCD images as shareware. The images are on IBM - formatted 5.25 floppies and 3.5 discs (DD and HD). The files are *.PCX or *.TIF formats and have been squeezed by LHARC. Asking $2 per disc and wants you to write for full inventory of available files. He is also promoting subscription to the CCD News, a periodical, at $6 per year. Joe can be reached at 2610 Belcastro St, Las Vegas, NV, 89117 Tel - 702-368-1884 12/91

**C-8, 1974** Stock orange tube model with sand cast fork arms, excellent condition. Visual back, 1-1/4 diagonal, 8X50 finder, special coatings, wedge, tripod with Orion accessory tray, no eyepieces. Other than tray and finder, this scope has not been mutilated by modifications. $1100 Bill Dellings (510) 792-9206 1/92

**C-5 Orange Optical Tube** assembly on a Tasco-like German Equatorial mount. 6X30 Finder, special coatings, visual back, 1-1/4 diagonal, No eyepieces. Same mount pictured on Orion Telescope Center's "Space Probe 4.5" in their catalog, but w/o motor hook-up linkage. Nice slow motion controls. Ideal for travel and quick set up gazing sessions. Super RFT when used with Celestron F6.3 reducer/corrector. Tube assembly in near mint condition. $800 Bill Dellings (510) 792-9206 1/92

**16" Transparent Celestial Globe** depicting the 88 constellations by Spherical Concepts, INC. W/instruction book by George Lovi, movable Earth and Sun inside. See a picture in Dec '91 Astronomy, P.105 or P.5 in Men, Monsters and the Modern Universe. List $275, will sell for $165. Excellent condition. (Desk Top stand). Bill Dellings (510) 792-9206 1/92

**Tele-View 7.4 mm Eyepiece** (1-1/4") $50. Bill Dellings (510) 792-9206 1/92

**WANTED 5" STARFIRE,** W/or/WO 600 Mount and Pier. Bill Dellings (510) 792-9206 1/92

**PERSONAL:** Traveling companion SWF 30-50 wanted for Spring 92, 3 month sabbtical trip to Europe with photo Prof.

Visiting observatories and cultural attractions in Spain, France, Italy, Greece, Hungary, Austria, Czech., Germany, Holland, England. Will pay major expenses. Call, write or fax to John Sandford, (417) 722-7900; 2195 Raleigh Ave. Costa Mesa, CA. 92627 11/91

**NEW and expanded catalog** of Astronomy Materials available from the ASP ASP
Catalog Request Dept.
390 Ashton Ave.
San Francisco, CA 94112
There is some neat video material here.

**COSMOCON 91** A unique Astronomy Convention in the San Francisco bay Area !! This is a joint convention hosted by the Astronomical Association of Northern California celebrating the excitement, wonder, and spirit of discovery in Astronomy. Co-hosted by San Jose State University
July 13 — 18, 1992
For registration packet and further information about the convention, write to:
COSMOCON 92
Krebs Convention Management Services
Pioneer Square, Suite 200
555 De Haro St.
San Francisco, Ca 94107-2348
(415) 255-1279

**Wanted:** Pentax / Spot Matic body w/wo Lenses, Herb Robbins (408) 269-0946 1/92

**Custom C-14 Astrophotographic system,** includes giant cold camera, gasing equipment, special mounting, and numerous extras. Make offer - call Norm (408)-378-4488 12/91

**Quantum 4** Used once, in the box - call Norm (408)-378-4488 12/91

**C-8 w/Cold Camera** - Also make offer Call Norm (408)-378-4488 12/91

---

**EPHEMERIS Page 5 January 1992**

=== PAGE 6 ===
# The Presidential Papers

I missed last months bulletin deadline, so I shall be a bit more aware of dates and the passage of time. Lately it seems that the economy has hit everyone, many of us worry whether there will be an income to pay the bills and how we shall keep hearth and kin together. The only solice I can offer is that hard times make strong people and societies, perhaps we needed a reset to get back to reality. We and our elected representatives have confused wants and needs and over taxed the system. What does this have to do with astronomy?

Perhaps if the winter fog ever clears, it might help a small amount to turn off the TV and take out the telescope. Come out to one or more of our public service events. As you know the SJAA will put on a presentation for just about anyone that has the temerity to ask. Over the past several months the club, actually a small band of hearty individuals, has provided telescopes and considerable expertise to varied groups about the south bay area. There have been several schools, cub scout groups, even the police athletic league. Every one of these events that I have attended usually had a few things in common, lots of eager kids eager to look at and through the telescopes. Many of the adults in the crowd have never seen a real astronomical telescope up close and personal. There seems to be much pleasure taken by the hardy souls willing to subject themselves to endless questions. I would urge you to miss a few of those holiday specials and get out to some of these events.

And now for something completely different. Last month I went up to Fremont peak a couple of times. I was surprized at how few winter time astronomers there are anymore. One evening I had the park all to my self. Another night there were three of us maniacs. The winter skies can be quite spectacular. One Saturday night Dave Barroso was setting up to do some observing with the 30" reflector, I casually asked if there would be any major objection to me mooching some photons. Well he gave in and I moved in. This turned out to be quite an evening, early on while we were waiting for it to get really dark, I wanted to look at Gamma Andromeda. Dave is in the process of observing every object listed in the entire NGC catalogue. Well he tolerated me and my proclivity for looking at big bright easy stuff, but only if it got good and he could get on with his observing program, Okay I said. Little did he know what evil lurks within. The air was good and Dave had collimated the scope that day so the images looked pretty good. There was some glare off the primary orange star so I stopped it down to 11 inches with the off axis stop. The blue secondary was a pretty ball, no diffraction rings but it was not boiling, actually it was pretty steady. Maybe some more magnification would be interesting. The 9mm Nagler seemed to do the trick, more power really shows the colors of bright stars well when the air is steady. Dave begrudgingly went up and took a look, "Yep! That's nice," and back to his book. While sitting up on the ladder I thought there was a separation in the blue secondary on one side. Hmm!

Out of habit I always look for the tertiary, a dimmer green star off the secondary, I had never seen it before but had read about it, 1/2 arc second separation the books had claimed. Well there seemed to be a third star poking itself into the field from time to time and always in the same place. I have seen turbulent air scatter light into a false image many times before but those usually appear randomly around the real star. This one was always in the same spot.Pat Donnelly was working out in front of the observatory with his C-8, I invited him up for a look as he is an avid double/multiple star observer. After looking a bit he also made the usual comments about how nice a pair they were, but no mention of the tertiary. I asked him to take another look, that usually triggers a thought of something being afoot. Seeing is a sometimes thing, after several long moments he mentions the secondary being elongated and a sometimes separate image. After more study all three of us agree it is there, the right position, color and magnitude, seems we finally resolved Gamma Andromeda into a triple!

Later that evening I wanted to look at M-42, the Orion Nebula, Well as we had been working over a bunch of faint fuzzies (dim galaxies) Dave didn't object strenuously. So I swung the scope over and took a peek, nice VERY NICE! Out of curiousity we decided to see what effect the various Lumicon filters would have. The UHC turns the Trapesium stars turquoise, yuck! The O-3 filters made them green and red, garish, I prefer the normal unfiltered version. The seeing still seemed fairly good as the detail of the inner region was very clear. Trying the Meade 14mm ultrawide, a Nagler type large heavy eyepiece, and the Nagler 9mm were rewarded with wonderful vistas. The Meade gives moderate power with good eye relief without the kidney bean shadows the old Nagler 13mm had. It has become my favorite eyepiece. Eventually we found 5-6 very faint stars in the Trapesium area in addition to the normal 6 bright stars. Other objects were observed and logged on a wonderful winters evening. I strongly urge you to break out the winter clothes and try the winter sky.

Another random thought. As you know this fall we started to solicit funds for a solar filter project. Many of you have come forward with contributions. I cannot thank you enough for your support. I have been shamelessly hustling just about every club member for contributions for this fund. I know you don't need anyone trying to guilt money out of you, a low pressure hustle, you can say no. Really. I am trying to get all of us, about 200 at last count, to contribute a buck a month, Yep, just $12 a year for one year. If we all pitch in we'll have enough next year. What do I want this money for you ask? A T-scanner I reply, a Hydrogen Alpha filter. I really want to add solar astronomy to our public programs. The H-a filter will allow us to safely show prominences to the general public. Our members will also be able to sign up and borrow it when not in use. According to the treasurer, Jack Peterson, we have $411.50 in the fund at the last board meeting. We are well on our way to success. ...Jeff Z.

---

**EPHEMERIS** Page 6 January 1992

=== PAGE 7 ===
# SPECIAL NOTICE

**THERE IS A GENERAL MEETING SITE CHANGE**

**BEGINING IN JANUARY 1992 THE LOCATION**

**WILL BE AT THE MILPITAS LIBRARY JUST OFF**

**CALAVERAS BOULEVARD ON**

**MILPITAS BLVD. BEHIND**

**THE MILPITAS CIVIC CENTER.**

---

**TO GET THERE FROM 880 (17) HEADING SOUTH/NORTH. TURN AND HEAD EAST ON 237 (CALAVERAS BLVD.) OVER THE RAILROAD OVERPASS. THE CIVIC CENTER WILL BE ON THE LEFT SIDE WHERE YOU WILL TURN ONTO MILPITAS BLVD...JUST AFTER THE POILCE STATION AT THE NEXT ENTRANCE WILL BE THE LIBRARY.**

---

**TO GET THERE FROM 680 HEADING SOUTH/NORTH. TURNAND HEAD WEST ON CALAVERAS BLVD. THECIVIC CENTER WILL BE ON THE RIGHT SIDE WHERE YOU WILL TURN ONTO MILPITAS BLVD...JUST AFTER THE POLICE STATION AT THE NEXT ENTRANCE WILL BE THE LIBRARY.**

---

**PLEASE COME AND LISTEN TO**

**ETHAN CLIFTON DISCUSS OUR**

**OBSERVATORY PROJECT**

**Febuary we'll hear Dr. Schramm talking about Cosmology**

**March has the potential to hear Shilo Unruh of Lick Observatory**

---

## Offices and Board of Directors

**Pres: Jack Zeiders -** 408-281-0220  
**V Pres: Paul Mancuso** 408-946-0738  
**Treas: Jack Peterson-** 408-262-1457  
**Sec: Jim Van Nuland-** 408-371-1307  
**Dir: Gene Clanaros-** 408-923-6800  
**Dir: Del Johnson-** 408-448-0239  
**Dir: Steve Greenberg-** 209-239-2154  
**Dir: Paul Barton-** 408-377-0148  
**Dir: Bob Madden-** 408-264-4488

## Ephemeris Contributors

**Don Machholtz -** 916-346-8963  
**Pat Donnelly -** 408-778-2741  
**Richard Stanton -** 408-662-0205  
**Steve Gotlib -** 415-525-7968  
**Bob Hingernut -** 408-263-4455  
**Jay Freeman -** 415-852-9962

**Editor**

**Bob Madden -** 408-264-4488

---

## EPHEMERIDES

### PERIODIC COMET HARTLEY 2 (1991t)

| DATE (UT) | RA (2000) DEC | ELONG | SKY | MAG |
|-----------|---------------|-------|-----|-----|
| 12-25 | 10h59.9m -08°04' | 103° | M | 10.7 |
| 12-30 | 10h59.6m -08°33' | 108° | M | 10.8 |
| 01-04 | 10h58.3m -08°54' | 113° | M | 10.9 |
| 01-09 | 10h55.9m -09°07' | 118° | M | 11.0 |
| 01-14 | 10h52.5m -09°11' | 124° | M | 11.1 |
| 01-19 | 10h48.2m -09°06' | 129° | M | 11.2 |
| 01-24 | 10h43.1m -08°52' | 135° | M | 11.3 |
| 01-29 | 10h37.3m -08°29' | 141° | M | 11.4 |
| 02-03 | 10h31.0m -07°58' | 147° | M | 11.6 |
| 02-08 | 10h24.4m -07°19' | 153° | M | 11.7 |

### PERIODIC COMET FAYE (1991n)

| DATE (UT) | RA (2000) DEC | ELONG | SKY | MAG |
|-----------|---------------|-------|-----|-----|
| 12-25 | 02h32.8m +01°56' | 123° | E | 11.0 |
| 12-30 | 02h40.2m +02°30' | 120° | E | 11.1 |
| 01-04 | 02h48.0m +03°08' | 117° | E | 11.3 |
| 01-09 | 02h56.3m +03°50' | 114° | E | 11.5 |
| 01-14 | 03h04.8m +04°35' | 111° | E | 11.6 |
| 01-19 | 03h13.7m +05°22' | 109° | E | 11.8 |
| 01-24 | 03h22.8m +06°09' | 106° | E | 12.0 |

### COMET SHOEMAKER-LEVY (1991d)

| DATE (UT) | RA (2000) DEC | ELONG | SKY | MAG |
|-----------|---------------|-------|-----|-----|
| 12-25 | 16h26.9m +38°50' | 67° | M | 11.0 |
| 12-30 | 16h40.9m +39°16' | 68° | M | 11.0 |
| 01-04 | 16h50.5m +39°59' | 69° | M | 11.0 |
| 01-09 | 17h08.9m +40°16' | 69° | M | 11.0 |
| 01-14 | 17h27.0m +40°30' | 69° | M | 11.0 |
| 01-19 | 17h44.7m +40°42' | 69° | M | 11.0 |
| 01-24 | 18h01.8m +40°51' | 69° | M | 11.0 |
| 01-29 | 18h17.9m +40°56' | 68° | M | 11.0 |
| 02-03 | 18h34.2m +41°04' | 67° | M | 11.1 |
| 02-08 | 18h49.3m +41°09' | 67° | M | 11.1 |

Don Machholtz 916-346-8963

---

## Comet Commets

### Don Machholtz

**Two more comets have been discovered recently. Three faint comets remain visible to us. Beginning with this issue I'll supply only the Epoch 2000 coordinates for comets. Most visual observers have little use for the Epoch 1950 coordinates.**

**Periodic Comet Shoemaker-Levy 6 (1991b):** Carolyn and Eugene Shoemaker and David Levey used the 18" Schmidt camera at Mt. Palomar to pick up this comet on Nov. 7. Early reports

had it as bright as magnitude eleven, but it rapidly faded. The orbital period is 7.5 years.

**Periodic comet Tsuchinshan 1 (1991c):** T. Seki of Japan recovered this comet on Nov. 8 at magnitude 17. It is now fading.

**CometSchoemaker-Levy (1991d):** The Schoemakers and David Levy discovered this comet on Nov. 13 at magnitude 16. It is presently getting dimmer.

---

**EPHEMERIS**

**Page 7**

**January 1992**

=== PAGE 8 ===
# SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIP

**EPHEMERIS** is published monthly by the San Jose Astronomical Association - 3509 Calico Ave., San Jose California 95124, Members are encouraged to submit articles for publication. These should be typed and submitted **no later than the 12th of the previous month**. All submissions should be sent to the editor, Bob Madden, 1616 Inglis Lane, San Jose, California 95118

---

## Membership only: $10 Membership/S&T: $28 Junior (under 18): $18

Name: __________________________________________ Please bring this form to any SJAA Meeting or send to:

Address: _________________________________________ Jack Peterson, Treasurer

__________________________________________________ San Jose Astronomical Association
                                                   1840 Yosmite Drive
Telephone: _______________________________________ Milpitas, CA 95035
                                                   Telephone: (408) 262-1475

MAKE CHECKS PAYABLE TO "SJAA"

Please check type of membership and if NEW or RENEWAL

Membership only ___ Membership/S&T ___ Junior (under 18) ___ New __ Renew ___

---

**SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION**
**1840 YOSMITE DRIVE**
**MILPITAS, CA. 95035**

**NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION**

**U.S. POSTAGE PAID**

**PERMIT NO. 5381**

**SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA**

---

*SJAA HOTLINE*
*24 HOUR INFORMATION*
*408-559-1221*

---

**EPHEMERIS** Page 8 **January 1992**