=== PAGE 1 ===
# SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION EPHEMERIS

## AUGUST 1984

---

## FROM THE EDITORS DESK
BY: JOHN GLEASON

I want to extend my appreciation to those members who have given me positive feedback on the new Ephemeris. Would you believe that the club newspaper is costing just over $1600 to produce each month?

Special thanks to those of you who submitted articles this month, Steve Gottlieb, Jim Van Nuland, Don Machholz, Bob Fingerhut

There is a special event to take notice of. The Board of Directors have taken a vacation - Reason, the Board members have decided to have a special star party at Marriott's Great America on August 4th. This will be a day long affair to include solar observing during the day and lunar and planetary observing during the evening hours.

If you are interested in using a big telescope, you will need to contact Frank Dibble at (408) 735-9597. If you are wondering what it is like to spend 14 hours at Marriott's with a telescope, then please read this months article on Great America.

The last month Ephemeris also mentioned experiencing the difficulties of 35mm film and camera and then processing it as a negative. This was done to see if it compaired to hypersensitized filmed processed in the same manner. The first results with the cold camera was quite phenomenal! There will be a complete report in an up-comming issue of the Ephemeris.

### GREAT AMERICA

July 7th found 12 members of the SJAA set up with telescopes in Hometown Square at Marriott's Great America. With attendance of over 5000 interested people, SJAA members demonstrated their astronomical expertise to about 500 interested people who came by to look through and talk telescopes. Probably the most ask question of the day was; How much did that telescope?" By the end of the day C14 I were selling for $10,000 and Questar's for around $5,000. - It was encouraging to hear comments from people about how much better the view was through Questar binoviewer over the views through those "Orange" telescopes, despite the comments from Frank about "those Orange telescopes you see so much" Well, at least that is what they were seeing and thought we had pictures inside the telescopes. There will be another opportunity for SJAA members to set up their telescopes for the public at Great America on August 4th. If you are interested in participating then please contact Frank Dibble at (408) 735-9597 as soon as possible. special thanks to Frank for doing the footwork in organizing these star parties at Great America for the past 2 years.

### LAST CALL FOR MEMBERSHIP RENEWALS

If you have not renewed your membership yet, than this will be your last Ephemeris. Please send renewal form, remittance, and if you want to renew Sky & Telescope, thier white envelope including Paul Fingerhut, Treasurer, SJAA, 940 Rio Verde Pl., Milpitas, Ca. 95035. (408) 263-4655. Thanks!

---

## EVENTS CALENDAR

### AUGUST 4

This will be a special star party at Marriott's Great America. If you are interested in attending, than you will need to contact Frank Dibble at 735-9597 for a list of people attending. [editorial/article]

### AUGUST 11

Indoor star party at the Los Gatos Red Cross building. [see map]

### AUGUST 18

SJAA Board of directors meeting at the Los Gatos Red Cross building. (see map) All members welcome to attend.

### AUGUST 25

Summer star party at Fremont Peak state park. (see map) Enjoy a warm evenings observing these days, after a hard long summer at the Park. You can usually find 50 - 100 amateur astronomers and as many telescopes at these summer star parties. This is an excellent opportunity for beginners to check out and use various types of telescopes before making the big purchase for that Takahashi Fluorite Refractor.

### SEPTEMBER 1

Star party at Grant Ranch county park. (see map) This is a first quarter moon and planet party. This will be a good poor mans site for members to check out if I am not as close if they have not already. The park is close to the San Jose area, and the SJAA is considering this location for an observatory site

### SEPTEMBER 8

Equipment and slide night at the Los Gatos Red Cross Building. This usually well attended function allows members to show off recent astrophotos, slides of astronomical events, and brag about thier equipment. Show up in the parking lot for observing. Ed- note: I personally encourage members to bring and show off their equipment and astrophotos. These are the kind of meetings that I can remember the first? equipment night that I attended, the rest is history!

---

## ASTROMART

FOR SALE: C8 with coatings, tripod/wedge, dual-axis drive corrector, offaxis guider, cold camera, and much more. $800/offer CONTACT: Gary Hethcoat (408) 730-9781, evenings.

=== PAGE 2 ===
# SPACE UPDATE
BY: BOB FINGERHUT

## NEXT TWO SHUTTLE MISSIONS COMBINED

The first launch of the shuttle orbiter Discovery is now planned for August 24, in order to put the program back on schedule. Discovery's first two missions will be combined into one. The manifest will include a Leasat communications satellite, a miniature drug manufacturing experiment, two spare APUs from the second factory from the original first flight, and two communications satellites from the second. Postponed are the flight of a large Earth-mapping camera, the Spartan astrophysics observatory, and a Getaway Special. The Leasat will be added to an October flight.

The test flight day that Discovery's launch was cancelled has been traced to a liquid contaminant on a transistor in one of the computers. The cause of the shut down, four seconds before launch the next day is still uncertain. The problem with Discovery's engines, whose main fuel valve failed to open, has been replaced with the one removed from Discovery June 15, due to a delaminated heat shield. It has been repaired. The number three APU was also removed due to a leak in one of the pump failings which had worsened since the flight readiness firing on June 2.

## NOAA-8 TUMBLES OUT OF CONTROL

The NOAA-8 weather satellite launched in March 1983 has been tumbling since June 30 and can no longer be controlled. The problem is with onboard clock interactions which allow its stabilizing gyroscopes to desynchronize its weather environment monitoring functions and lose altitude control. The crippled NOAA-8 also carries a Sarsat search and rescue payload.

## SPACE PRODUCT GOES TO MARKET

NASA has provided the government, supply, the National Bureau of Standards with uniform latex spheres produced on several previous space shuttle flights. The 10 micrometer polystyrene spheres will be used to determine relative sizes of objects under microscopes and to calibrate particle counters. The aerospace material bureau at standards will sell the spheres in packets of 5 milliliters for $300 to $400.

## GIOTTO SENT TO FRANCE FOR TESTING

The Halley's comet intercept spacecraft, Giotto, has completed electromagnetic and optical compatibility tests in England. It was shipped June 5 to Toulouse France to undergo solar simulation, thermal vacuum, vibration, and acoustic tests. It will be shipped in early 1985 to Noordwijk Holland for final adjustments and then to Guiana Space Center for launch in July 1985.

# DEEP SKY NOTES

BY: STEVE GOTTLIEB

Well placed for viewing in August is Delphinus, the dolphin, a small but obvious kite shaped asterism located east of Aquila. Though skirting the eastern border of the Milky Way, the Burnham Celestial Handbook and the Tirico Sky Atlas list only 4 deep sky objects within the boundaries, all of them clusters. But referring to the more extensive RNGC and the Uppsala General Catalog of Galaxies (UGC), I found the region of Delphinus itself of the Milky Way peppered with faint galaxies below the Burnham magnitude limit of 14. So, armed with a list of deep sky objects I started combing the Delphinus region on June 29 in the Sierra foothills near Fiddletown, and tracked down a total of 11 objects within the borders of Delphinus.

NGC 6891: This mag 10 planetary is very small (15"x7"), but has a fairly high surface brightness and likes higher magnification. Compact 100x appeared only as an out of focus blue star, but 200x clearly resolved the disk of this planetary.

NGC 6905: The second planetary in Delphinus is much easier to identify as a planetary, classified M6(3) in Strasbourg catalog 15 (43-3). In the C8 I recorded 6905 as moderately bright, uniform in surface brightness and slightly extended North - South. It is located along one side of a small isosceles triangle of stars.

NGC 6934: This small globular (1.5') is bright enough at mag. 9 to be visible in my 10x50 binoculars! At 200x, it was very mottled in the C8 and on the verge of resolution. Switching to my 13 1/4" 200x partially resolved the outer regions into 15 faint stars, mainly South of the core.

NGC 7006: At a distance of 185,000 light years from Earth, this globular lies at a distance comparable to the Magellanic Clouds. Because of the high degree stellar concentration, it was still moderately bright in the 13" at mag. 11.4

The following table gives information on the objects not listed in Burnham's Celestial Handbook:

| NAME | R.A. | DEC. | Mp | SIZE |
|------|------|------|-----|------|
| NGC 6928 | 20h30.4' | 09 45' | 13.7 | 2.2'x0.6' |
| NGC 6930 | 20h30.6' | 09 42' | 14.3 | 1.2'X0.5' |
| NGC 6944 | 20h35.9' | 06 49' | 14.6 | 0.35' |
| NGC 6954 | 20h41.5' | 03 02' | 14.2 | 0.9'X0.5' |
| NGC 6956 | 20h41.6' | 12 20' | 13.5 | 1.7'X1.6' |
| UGC 11620 | 20h41.8' | 12 14' | 14.5 | 0.7'X0.4' |
| NGC 6972 | 20h47.6' | 09 43' | 14.3 | 1.2'X0.5' |

The only person to respond to my query last month about IC 1257 in Ophiuchus was Herman Frail. Who mentioned that it was faintly visible in a 16" telescope at Henry Coe Park 5 years ago.

Steve Gottlieb (415) 524-4678

## THE UPCOMING PERSEID METEOR SHOWER
BY: Don Machholz

This year's installment of the annual Perseids meteor shower peaks in the early morning of Sunday, Aug. 12. Unfortunately the Moon will be full just hours before and the moonlight will drown out all but the brightest meteors. Do not dispair, however. The morning prior to Aug. 12 will be darker, as the waning gibbous when meteors should be more easily visible.

Late July and early August are full of meteor showers, and they are better seen in the morning sky. July 8 is the center of the Capricornids shower, which stretches until late August. The telluric feature of this meteor shower is its slow rate, compared to meteors of the constellation Capricorn. The hourly rate is 5-10 meteors.

July 29 is the center of the Delta Aquarids, a massive, spread-out, weak shower of meteors spanning from mid-July until late August. This continues until mid-September. The hourly rate is between 10 and 25.

When you add all these meteor showers to the Perseids, you end up with a lot of observable meteors. So beginning in early August and lasting until Aug. 16, get out there and observe the meteors. Not all will be from the famous Perseid stream, but, does it really matter anyway?

=== PAGE 3 ===
# THE SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION

Deep-sky observing, astrophotography, Telescope making, Eclipses, Comets-and astronomy. Whatever your astronomical interest, you'll find people in the San Jose Astronomical Association who will enjoy sharing their knowledge with you.

## ACTIVITIES

The SJAA sponsors an activity every Saturday night (except around certain holidays).

**General Meetings**, featuring programs on various astronomical subjects, are held once a month in the Engineering Science Building at the University of Santa Clara.

**Star Parties**-group observing sessions-are held at several different locations, some close to the San Jose area, and some in the adjacent mountains.

**Indoor "Star Parties"** provide an informal opportunity for slides, work on equipment, exchange ideas, etc. They are held in the Los Gatos Red Cross building.

## MEMBERSHIP BENEFITS

You can best be a member of the San Jose Astronomical Association to participate in our activities. But membership does grant certain advantages:

**Twelve months of Sky and Telescope magazine, and reduced rates on products from Sky Publishing Corporation**

**The SJAA EPHEMERIS**, an award-winning newsletter, containing a calendar of events and activities and other interesting items; Use of club telescopes (both reflectors and refractors are available); **Access to the SJAA's library of books, magazines, and pamphlets**.

The San Jose Astronomical Association, founded in 1954, is a non-profit group devoted to expanding the general public's interest and capabilities in astronomical research within the capabilities of amateurs, and promoting the science of astronomy.

---

**MEMBERSHIP ONLY: $8.00     MEMBERSHIP/S&T: $21.00     JUNIOR (UNDER 12): $15.00**

---

# SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION

Name ____________________________________________

Address __________________________________________

__________________________________________________

Telephone (______)_________________________________

Please bring this form to any SJAA meeting, or send to:
Jim van Nuland, Secretary
San Jose Astronomical Association
5509 Calico Avenue, San Jose, CA 95124

[Phone: (408) 371-1307]

Membership: Adult ___ Junior (under 18) ___
*Bulletin* Subscription only: ___

## Questionnaire (optional)

What are your astronomical interests (e.g. astro-photography, deep-sky observation, telescope making, etc.)? ___________________________________________

__________________________________________________

__________________________________________________

__________________________________________________

Do you own a telescope? _________ If so, what kind?

__________________________________________________

Is there any specific area of astronomy that you feel qualified to help others with? _________________________

__________________________________________________

__________________________________________________

=== PAGE 4 ===
# SJAA

## GENERAL MEETINGS:

**University of Santa Clara, Alumni Science Hall, room 102.** Heading north on Hwy 17, exit at Bascom/Washington Ave. (north), proceed to Laurelton exit at the Alameda (south), proceed to Hwy 17, exit at the Alameda (north), proceed to Franklin, then turn left. Go two blocks and turn left into the parking lot. Alumni Science Hall is the 3 story building that borders the east end of the parking lot. Room 102 is on the ground floor and is best gotten to by entering the building from the left side (west side of the building when walking in from the parking lot.

![Map showing route from Alameda to Alumni Science Hall via Bascom, Franklin, and Hwy 17]

## INDOOR STAR PARTIES:

**Los Gatos Red Cross Building, 18011 Los Gatos-Saratoga Rd, Los Gatos.** From Hwy 17 south, take the Hwy 9 (Saratoga) exit and continue south on Hwy 9 (Big Basin Wy.) for about 1.5 miles. Turn right at Rose Ave., and turn right immediately into the parking lot of the Red Cross Building.

![Map showing route to Los Gatos Red Cross Building]

## GRANT RANCH COUNTY PARK:

This site is a new one for the SJAA so come and try it out. Located on Mt. Hamilton Road, halfway between San Jose and Lick Observatory. To get to Mt. Hamilton Road, take Hwy 101 (either direction) to Alum Rock Ave., turn east on Alum Rock, which becomes Mt. Hamilton Road and follow it. Grant Ranch is just past the Quimby road intersection. After sunset the park front gate will be locked with the SJAA's combination lock. Use the sequence 4565 to open, but be sure to lock the gate before you come or going. There are two gates, the lock may be on the exit gate, if so enter the park from this gate.

![Map showing route to Grant Ranch Park via Mt. Hamilton Rd and Quimby Rd from Hwy 680 and Hwy 101]

## HENRY COE STATE PARK:

Take Hwy 101 south towards Gilroy and take the East Dunne exit. Continue east towards the hills (past Anderson Reservoir), for about 12 miles to the park. Past the park entrance you will see old ranch buildings on the right which is the Visitor's Center. The star party and club combination is 4565. Always lock the gate after yourself if arriving after sunset, please park outside the gate and hike in first to find an observing site before driving in. Parking lights only after dark, please.

![Map showing route to Henry Coe State Park via Hwy 101 South and East Dunne exit]

## FREMONT PEAK STATE PARK:

Take Hwy 101 south towards Salinas. Take Hwy 156 east (San Juan Bautista) for two miles to a yellow flashing light. Turn right and go about 25 miles to where road curves slightly to the left and splits. Stay left for about another 6 miles. Road curves to the left again. Follow road for about 11 miles up into the park. SJAA sets up in Coulter Camp overflow area. It's visible as you drive up into main area of camp. Parking lights only after dark, please.

![Map showing route to Fremont Peak State Park via Hwy 156 E and Yellow Light turn]

EPHEMERIS is published monthly by the San Jose Astronomical Association, 3905 Calico Ave., San Jose, Cas. 95124

## OFFICERS:

| Position | Name | Address | Phone |
|----------|------|---------|-------|
| PRESIDENT | Dave Ambrose | 816 Everett St. El Cerrito, CA. 94530 | (415) 524-0869 |
| Vice-Pres | Derni Medlock | 15022 Broadway Terrace, Oakland, CA. 95124 | (415) 654-6794 |
| Sec. | Chris Van Nuhland | 3509 Galiso Ave., San Jose, CA. 95124 | (408) 371-1307 |
| Treas. | Robert Fingerhut | 340 Rio Verde Plaza #4, Milpitas, CA. 95035 | (408) 263-4455 |

## BOARD OF DIRECTORS:

Paul Mancuso (408) 946-0738, Steve Greenberg (415) 443-8638, Tom Ahl (408) 997-1383, Gene Cisneros (408) 923-6800, Joe Sunseri, Chris Pratt (408) 629-2994

**EPHEMERIS EDITOR:** John Gleason 5361 Port Sailwood Dr., Newark, CA. 94560

=== PAGE 5 ===
# SJAA EPHEMERIS

## A.B. GREGORY AWARD

At the July board meeting nominations were taken and voted on for the Dr. A.B. Gregory award. The award is to be presented to a club member who has contributed much to the SJAA in the past year. This years winner is Jim Van Nuland.

Jim Van Nuland is a long time member of the SJAA. He has been our club secretary for many years and continues to be the working force behind the scenes for the SJAA. Jim is also well known for setting up the now famous SJAA Occultation star parties, and is a avid promoter of the apeodizing screen for deep-sky observing. In addition to that, Jim is also a regular contributor to the SJAA Ephemeris. His Calico Observatory articles appear each month and cover a wide range of topics. CONGRATULATIONS JIM!

## CALICO OBSERVATORY

### JUPITER'S RED SPOT EPHEMERIDES

The critical parameter for the Great Spot-watching continues to be seeing. With very steady air, the Spot is readily seen with an 8-inch, and probably with smaller instruments. Please drop me a card indicating your results. Please include telescope size, magnification, seeing conditions, and a few words about your results.

**Great Red Spot on Meridian -- PDT**

| da mo | d | h | m | da mo | d | h | m |
|-------|---|-------|-------|-------|---|-------|-------|
| W | 8 | 10 | 21 pm | Sa | 8 | 18 | 9 | 26 pm |
| F | 8 | 3 | 11 | 57 pm | M | 8 | 20 | 11 | 4 pm |
| M | 8 | 6 | 9 | 31 pm | Tu | 8 | 23 | 8 | 29 pm |
| W | 8 | 8 | 11 | 3 pm | Sa | 8 | 25 | 10 | 7 pm |
| Sa | 8 | 11 | 0 | 48 am | M | 8 | 27 | 11 | 45 pm |
| Sa | 8 | 11 | 8 | 31 pm | Th | 8 | 30 | 9 | 15 pm |
| M | 8 | 13 | 10 | 17 pm | Sa | 9 | 1 | 10 | 53 pm |
| W | 8 | 15 | 11 | 55 pm | Tu | 9 | 4 | 8 | 24 pm |

**Great Red Spot on Meridian -- PDT**

| da mo | d | h | m | da mo | d | h | m |
|-------|---|-------|-------|-------|---|-------|-------|
| Sa | 9 | 1 | 10 | 57 pm | F | 9 | 21 | 7 | 31 pm |
| Tu | 9 | 4 | 8 | 26 pm | Su | 9 | 23 | 9 | 10 pm |
| Th | 9 | 6 | 10 | 5 pm | F | 9 | 28 | 8 | 16 pm |
| Tu | 9 | 11 | 9 | 11 pm | W | 10 | 3 | 7 | 31 pm |
| Su | 9 | 16 | 8 | 28 pm | F | 10 | 5 | 9 | 3 pm |
| Tu | 9 | 18 | 10 | 4 pm | W | 10 | 10 | 8 | 19 pm |

Clear Skies,
Jim Van Nuland

## COMET COMMENTS

BY: DON MACHHOLZ

In July, one bright comet, two newly discovered, and two faint returning comets recovered in the past few weeks. The discovery is the second one by amateur astronomers for 1984, the average number of such discoveries each year since 1975 is three. While this does not make it easy to check on the positions of these faint periodic comets visible in those with large-aperture telescopes. Finally, in our Past Discovery dept., we'll look at some of the periodic comets found among the 28 comets discovered by amateurs between 1975 and 1983.

Periodic Comet Wolf-Harrington (1984g): This comet was recovered by Mr. Gibson of Australia on the June 2 when it was 49° the 48" Schmidt and the comet was then in the morning sky, in Aries near its predicted position, at magnitude 17. If it is closest to Sun in late September, and is not expected to get brighter than mag. 13.

Periodic Comet Faye (1984h): I also recovered this one with the 48" telescope at Palomar on the morning of June 8, the comet appeared mag. 16 and was 34 degrees from the Sun. Two weeks later, amateur astronomer Charles Morris from Southern California also observed it, still a difficult object at mag 15-16. This comet is at the northern limit of perihelion July 10 (at 1.6 AU) and will get no brighter than mag. 12.5 as it moves away from the Sun.

Comet Austin (1984i): Just to start off, Rodney Austin of New Zealand discovered this 8th mag. object in the morning sky, the comet was found roughly 70 degrees from the Sun near -38 deg. declination. At astronomical twilight the comet was 45 degrees high in his eastern sky, for those of us in the U.S. whose latitudes are 30 to 40 degrees below our eastern horiiazon we can see what a 75 degree change in latitude does to the position of a comet! At this time (July 11) I have no further information on this comet, but I hope to have positions by the end of July.

Halley's Comet on Aug. 15th: RA: 06hr 37.7m; Dec: -+13degrees.8. Distance from the Sun: 6.48 AU. Distance from the Earth: 7.19 AU. Magnitude: 19.9

**DRTE R. A. (1950) Dec. Elong. Mag.**

### Comet Rustin (1984i)

| Date | RA | Dec | Elong | Mag |
|------|----------|----------|------|-----|
| 07-29 | 18h 05.9m | +00°29' | 30° | 6.9 |
| 08-03 | 18h 10.8m | +04°30' | 24° | 6.4 |
| 08-08 | 18h 07.8m | +08°28' | 16° | 5.7 |
| 08-13 | 18 9h 55.2m | +12°42' | 7° | 5.6 |
| 08-18 | 09h 39.6m | +15°41' | 4° | 6.4 |
| 08-23 | 09h 25.1m | +20°00' | 13° | 7.5 |
| 08-28 | 09h 12.3m | +22°48' | 22° | 8.5 |
| 09-02 | 09h 00.7m | +25°19' | 30° | 9.2 |
| 09-07 | 08h 49.5m | +27°45' | 36° | 9.8 |
| 09-12 | 08h 37.7m | +30°12' | 46° | 10.3 |
| 09-17 | 08h 24.5m | +32°47' | 54° | 10.6 |

PAST DISCOVERIES:

In the early days of comet hunting many of the discoveries were of periodic comets - those with orbital periods of under 200 years. Nowadays we see that the professional astronomers find most of the periodic comets, many of these being faint [mag 15-18]. Ones in near circular orbits just past the asteroid belt. Yet between 1975 and 1983 three of the 28 comets discovered by amateurs were periodic comets with periods of about 7, 8, and 16 - 500 years. We also find that some of the comets had high inclinations (1 + near 0 deg. or near 180 deg.) and four of the six are in a direct (counterclockwise) orbit. These low conditions help a comet to be captured by planets which aids in keeping them in the inner Solar System.

Conversely six of the 28 comets have hyperbolic orbits, meaning that they will never return to the inner Solar System. It is possible that tidal forces between the Sun and a planet have accelerated through the Solar System entered the system with excess energy, and/or was influenced by nongravitational forces (out-gassing "jets" from the nucleus).

The remaining 16 comets have near-parabolic orbits meaning they will return in over 1000 years, but they will return eventually. Don Machholz (408) 448-7077

=== PAGE 6 ===
# Commercial ads are priced according to size and may be placed by contacting: Gene Cisneros at (408) 923-6800.

## ATM coatings

**15022 BROADWAY TERRACE, OAKLAND, CA 94611**

Specializing in Aluminum Coatings with silicon monoxide over-coating for telescope mirrors.

| Size | Price |
|------|-------|
| 4¼" | $8.00 |
| 6" | $12.00 |
| 8" | $16.00 |
| 10" | $20.00 |
| 12½" | $24.00 |
| 14¼" | $28.00 |
| 16" | $50.00 |

Secondaries, when sent with primary mirror, free.
To remove old coatings $3.00. Minimum charge $8.00.
Include postage and insurance for return mail.
Mirror will be shipped in container received.

---

[THIS IS IMAGE: A black and white photograph of what appears to be a nebula or galaxy]

**LUMICON®**

**"Innovation in Astronomy"**
Visit or call LUMICON
for the most complete selection
of IN STOCK Telescopes and
Accessories in the West.

**WORLD CENTER FOR**
**★ ASTROPHOTOGRAPHY ★**

(415) 447-9570
2111 Research Dr #5E,
Livermore CA 94550

---

## Periodic Comet Fixe (1984h)

| Date | Time | RA | Dec | Mag |
|------|------|-----|-----|-----|
| 07-29 | 05h 18.6m | +19°13' | 46° 12.5 |
| 08-08 | 05h 47.3m | +18°53' | 49° 12.5 |
| 08-18 | 06h 16.0m | +18°11' | 51° 12.6 |
| 08-28 | 06h 42.8m | +17°12' | 54° 12.7 |
| 09-07 | 07h 08.0m | +15°59' | 58° 12.9 |
| 09-17 | 07h 31.3m | +14°35' | 62° 12.9 |

A faint comet climbing away from the Sun in the morning sky, it will probably be brighter than magnitude 13. Between you three faint comets, try to find all of them as you practice for Halley's.

---

## Hyperbolic Comets

| Comet Name | Incl. | Dir. | Eccen. | Per Dis(AU) |
|------------|-------|------|--------|-------------|
| Bradfield (1979c) | 136.2° | Retro. | 1.00006 | 0.413 |
| Kobayashi-Berger-Milon (1975h) | 90.9° | Direct | 1.00009 | 0.426 |
| Machholz (1978l) | 130.6° | Retro. | 1.00042 | 1.772 |
| Meier (1978f) | 43.8° | Direct | 1.00084 | 1.137 |
| Sato (1975q) | 94.0° | Retro. | 1.00121 | 0.864 |
| Bradfield (1975d) | 55.3° | Direct | 1.00141 | 1.217 |

---

## Periodic Comets

| Comet Name | Period (yrs) | Incl. | Dir. | Eccen. | Per Dis(AU) |
|------------|--------------|-------|------|--------|-------------|
| Haneda-Campos (1978j) | 5.97 | 6.0° | Direct | 0.665 | 1.101 |
| Denning-Fujikawa (1978n) | 9.01 | 8.7° | Direct | 0.820 | 0.779 |
| Boethin (1975a) | 11.8 | 5.9° | Direct | 0.788 | 1.094 |
| Bradfield (1979l) | 293.8 | 148.6° | Retro. | 0.988 | 0.146 |
| Meier (1979i) | 391.0 | 67.1° | Direct | 0.973 | 1.432 |
| Suzuki-Sai.-Mori(1975k) | 446.8 | 118.2° | Retro. | 0.986 | 0.938 |

---

**SJAA EPHEMERIS**
**3509 CALICO AVE**
**SAN JOSE,CA 95124**

**BULK RATE**
**U.S. POSTAGE PAID**
**PERMIT NO. 5381**
**SAN JOSE, CA. 95125**

---

**TIME VALUE-DATED**
**NEWS MATERIAL**