=== PAGE 1 ===
# San Jose AMATEUR ASTRONOMER

## THE MONTHLY BULLETIN OF SAN JOSE AMATEUR ASTRONOMERS, INC.

### FEBRUARY, 1970

**For Any Information Call:**  
President - Trudy Bell, 429-4161 (Santa Cruz)  
Vice President - Dave Erikson, 269-4838  
Bulletin Editor- Clayton Neece, 378-5574

## REGULAR S.J.A.A. MEETING

**Date** - Friday, February 6th

**Location** - the Leninger Community Center, 1300 Senter Rd., near the Spartan Stadium.

**Time** - Starts promptly at 8:00 p.m.

**Agenda** -

There will be a talk given by Dr. Larry Caroff of Ames, Moffet Field. He will talk on the Quasi-Stellar object, PHL-5200, which has a remarkable absorbtion envelope.

Also, we will vote on the irrevocable clause, which if passed, would give the club some tax exemptions. It is requested that all members attend for this reason.

## BOARD MEETING

Board members are requested to attend the meeting. If for any reason you can't attend, contact Dave Erikson.

**Date**- Friday, February 13th

**Location** - to be at the home of Clayton Neece, 1650 Calado Ct., in Campbell. Call for directions.

**Time** - Starts at 8:00 p.m.

## STAR PARTY

Because of the moon's position, there will be no star party for the month of February.

=== PAGE 2 ===
# GENERAL INFORMATION:

Anyone needing information on the March solar eclipse or planned trips to Mexico should call Mr. Weslee Kendall, at 266-6730. There will be totality at this location.

In the January bulletin, the name Terry Tees, should be changed to Terry **Teays**. This is in the section that gives addresses of members going to college**.**

There has been considerable progress on the club's observatory. The pier for the mounting has been completed and the ground has been leveled for the building. We are now constructing a mounting for our 12.5 inch reflector, capable of handling a 20 inch. The site is located just south of the Mt. Umunhum radar complex. It is **easily** accessible from Hiway 17.

*The Public Is Welcome To All S.J.A.A. Events*

=== PAGE 3 ===
```markdown
CLASSIFIED *** CLASSIFIED *** CLASSIFIED *** CLASSIFIED

RV-6, 6" reflector w/o clock drive. 3 eyepieces (18mm, 9mm, 6mm). Cast iron legs added to improve mount. $125.00, Call 378-5574.

4" Solar Prominence telescope on German mount. Optics by Vector Laboratories, Palo Alto. Brand new, $1000.00. Also, Canon 35mm camera, f/1.9 lens, range finder type. $60.00 or best offer. Call 356-1448

*For the best in telescopic or scientific equipment, visit the Science Shop, 2928 South Bascom Ave., San Jose*
```

=== PAGE 4 ===
# WAA REPORT

The annual business meeting of the Western Amateur Astronomers was hold at the Hacienda Motor Hotel in Fresno, California on Saturday, 17 January, 1970. Twenty societies were represented; the meeting began at 8PM, after an informal dinner.

Under old business was pending the matter of disputing the closing of the Lick Observatory public observing program. WAA president Arthur Leonard read an answer he had received from Dr Robert Kraft, acting director of Lick, in response to a letter of inquiry. His report was supplemented by a four-page statement composed, and read in part, by TB Billi both efforts were well-received, and further action was deemed inappropriate.

New business: Martin Rohrke of Sacramento Valley Astronomical Society distributed lists of hotels and motels in Sacramento near the Mansion Inn (16th and H Streets) where the August 19-22, 1970 convention will be held.* A call for papers should appear within the next 60 days; WAA paper chairmen is Clifford Holmes, 8642 Wells, Riverside, Calif. 92509. Papers should be camera-ready. Also soon will appear detailed registration information and a list of restaurants. The recipient of the 1970 G Bruce Blair award was elected; his name will be revealed in the May issue of Sky and Telescope.

However, four months before the convention there will be two smaller conferences: 18-19 April, 1970--Telescope Makers Conference, Riverside, sponsored jointly by the Riverside Astronomical Society and the Riverside City College. Featured will be a competition for the optical and mechanical qualities of the amateur telescope. Speakers will be:

Robert Cox, Sky and Telescope ATM Editor  
Arthur Leonard, UC Davis  
Richard Buchroeder, U of Arizona, Tucson  
James Kent, Citrus College Optical Department  
Leland Barnes, Cal Astro Optics  
Robert Dixon, Planetarium Director, RCC  
Victor Nikolashin, U of Arizona, Tucson  
John Lytle, Hughes, Tucson

Full details will come in a future bulletin.

25 April, 1970--This very next weekend is the third annual Bay Area Astronomical Meeting, to be held at the Marin County Civic Center, 15 miles north of San Rafael, off Highway 101. There will be an optional dinner 5PM to 6PM, and the meeting itself is at 6PM, featuring speakers from UC Berkeley. Afterwards, weather permitting, will be a starparty. For details (and dinner-notification to be sent before April 18) write to Mal Beck, Secretary, Star Observers of Marin, 170 Hillside Ave, San Rafael, Calif, 94901.

The 1971 telescope makers conference will tentatively be held in northern California. The 1971 WAA convention will meet in Hawaii, and the 1972 convention has a tentative bid from Riverside.

Is anyone interested in solar filters, 3/4 and ½ Angstrom half bandwidth? Normally one such filter made of quartz would cost $3000. However, mica filters have been developed at lower cost and could be made easily on a production run. This would amount to considerable savings; if enough people showed interest, it could bring the price per filter down to well under $500. If you are interested, write before March 15 to George Carrcll, Consulting Engineer, 7114 Summitrose St, Tujunga, Calif, 91042; indicate how much you would be willing to pay if such a run were made.

The meeting was adjourned 10:10 PM.

-Trudy E. Bell  
WAA Representative for SJAA, Inc.

*This information can be obtained from me on request.

=== PAGE 5 ===
# MEETINGS OF THE MINDS

## or

## IN THE RIGHT PLACE AT THE WRONG TIME

Seen on a blackboard in the room for a final exam in statistical mechanics: "Anyone giving funny answers will be asked to walk the planck."

* * * *

Heard about 3AM one morning during the August, 1969 WAA convention at San Diego: Remark: "I know of a singing group named the Wheatstone Bridge, and a baseball team called the Ultraviolet Catastrophe."
Reply: "Oh, Rayleigh!"

* * * *

As they say in chemistry about gas laws: "It all Boyles down to..."

* * * *

Q: What do you get when you cross a grape and an elephant?
A: Grape elephant sine theta.

* * * *

After the 17 January, 1970 WAA business meeting, optician Bob Goff mentioned that he was designing a 22-inch portable, having an f/3 primary for an f/75 Casse-grains. Polaris Astronomical Society representative Norman James whistled in answer: "That's a mama Cass!"

(He's just handing us a lot of Goff. Ed.)

* * * *

For those interested in selenology, Jack Eastman writes: "Beware of (loony?) geologists who take everything for granite. Some think they're full of schist, but that's not gneiss. Those are my sediments!"


SACRAMENTO WANTS ICU!!