=== PAGE 1 ===
# Predictions
# sept.'79

**September 1** The SJAA annual equipment and slide night. This general meeting is to be held at the Los Gatos Red Cross building instead of the Rosicrucian Planetarium. 7:30 pm. Map will be inclosed. All members are welcome to bring any astronomy related slides and/or equipment.

**September 6** Full moon and total lunar eclipse starting at 12:21 am.

**September 7** Board meeting at Jim van Nuland's, 3509 Calico Ave., San Jose. 8:00 pm. 371-1307

**September 8** Indoor Star Party, Los Gatos Red Cross. 7:30 pm.

**September 15-16** AANC/NASA Joint Conference on Astronomy to be held at the NASA/ Ames Research Center. Attendance is limited and registration must be in by September 5. Contact the editor or Gerry Rattley for registration forms.

**September 21** New moon.

**September 22** SJAA Star Party at Henry Coe State Park.

**September 29** Indoor Star Party, Los Gatos Red Cross. 7:30 pm.

**October 5** Full moon.

**October 6** General Meeting, Rosicrucian Auditorium, Park & Naglee, San Jose'. 7:30 pm. The speaker this month will be Dr. John H. Wolfe, Chief Scientist for Project Pioneer: Saturn. The lecture will be on the Pioneer 11 Saturn encounter and will be a joint SJAA-Rosicrucian Society public lecture meeting. Invite your friends!

**October 12** Board meeting at Cathy Pinheiro's, 4029 Will Rogers Dr., #26, San Jose. 8:00 pm. 248-0210.

**October 20** New moon and SJAA Star Party at Digger Pine Campground. More information about this new site inside.

**October 27** Indoor Star Party, Los Gatos Red Cross. 7:30 pm.

---

"So there I stood after setting up the C-8....waiting for Polaris to rise."

Pete Manly

---

Gerry Rattley, pres. 732-0202     Denni Medlock, ed. 278-8475

1.

---

*The San Jose Astronomical Association*

=== PAGE 2 ===
# Observations

What's new? Well, a new star party site, for one thing, and it's looking better and better for those hard core astrophotographers in the club who have been bugged by too many flashlights and headlights at Fremont Peak, find Sanborn Canyon too close to the San Jose sky glow, and don't have enough room to work at Henry Coe. The name is Bigger Pine Campground and it's on the back side of Mt. Hamilton (I think I just heard a groan from the mountain road haters in the crowd). It's a private campground located at about two thousand feet elevation, with full facilities (flush toilets, showers, pool table), and a large baseball field to set up in. And best of all—the managers are welcoming the amateur astronomers who have been up there already. They're so far off the main highways they love the business. So far there hasn't been any problems with lights after dark from other campers. The SJAA as a club will have a chance to try out this site on October 20 but John Gleason, Jack Zeiders, and a few others have been up here and say there's good sky, good horizons, and a generally good observing site.

You've probably noticed that the speaker for October is a big one and that the plans evolving around this one lecture are larger than normal. There is a meaning to all this madness: if we get the draw we'd like (300-400 people) then a try for a Morrison lecturer in December would be feasible. So be a p.r. person yourself and start talking to your neighbors, your friends at work, put up a notice there if it's allowed. I haven't found a person yet who's not interested in Saturn.

The indoor star party held on August 11 turned out to be more of a circuit star party when a number of telescopes were set up in the parking lot and observations were made from there instead. The sky at the Los Gatos Red Cross building has never been all that bad, with the Milky Way clearly visible, so with nebula filter attached objects like the Lagoon and Trifid definitely were viewable. Besides Kevin's 18" and Chris Pratt's obsidian 8" there were a number of C-90's in the crowd. (I heard a rumor that Kevin had to point out Hercules to Gerry but I don't believe it.) The Perseids were also aiving off quite a display with a number of fiery flashes. Next general meeting is scope night so maybe we'll have more than a few telescopes set up to view through.

**Trivia department:** Those of you who didn't attend August's general meeting—you missed an excellent talk by Jay Freeman on his research group's extreme ultraviolet experiment aboard Apollo-Soyuz. I thought it was particularly interesting with the SJAA being locked out of the planetarium for about an hour before the security guard could be located. We were already to have the meeting right there in the park.

Do you know that the green flash can be observed during sunrise as well as sunset? (I didn't so that's why I seem so surprised.) People living west of the Great Lakes and on the Eastern seaboard observe it that way all the time.

**Don't bother counting...the SJAA has 90 members and 14 bulletin subscribers.** It will be more as soon as some of the stragglers wake up.

Loma Prieta is the 'official' SJAA site for observing the Lunar eclipse September 6.

---

**Needed:** A person to become the SJAA's publicity chairman. **Requirements:** Dedication, drive, and a desire to see the club prosper. **Duties to see** that the SJAA's public events such as Astronomy Day, Sanborn Canyon public star parties, and perhaps futher Morrision lectures get notice in the newspapers and radio. If interested contact Gerry Rattley at 732-0202.

Every month as I'm about to begin the latest bulletin I worry about having enough material to run a full five pages (five pages seems to be traditional for some reason), and every month I end up with exactly enough. I mean exactly enough. Last month's bulletin was exact down to the last word. With this I believe it's past time for me to thank all of the contributors, monthly and/or sporadic, without whose efforts this bulletin and editor would not have been possible. (I wouldn't have had anything to edit, now would I...) Special thanks go to those who were able to make the short deadline for this bulletin. No specific names are going to be mentioned—they know who they are (they should, anyway), and bulletin readers should recognize the regulars.

Want to put an article in the bulletin but don't know how to go about it? Anything goes as long as it's astronomically or SJAA related (one and the same, I hope), and can be gotten to me somewhere near the deadline stated each month. Handwritten articles will do but there won't be any objections to long—ready to print typewritten articles if you find making a contribution you wish to retain should write coming up on the latest star party, indoor star party, etc. That's how I got started on this and who knows, you may become bulletin editor some day!

**Deadline date for October's bulletin: September 22.**

Denni

---

**For sale:** Bushnell Banner binoculars, 7X50. $75.00. Call 267-8459

---

**"I can find them, but I just can't see them."**  
Debbie Moore

---

Pete and Jay at the Aug. 11 indoor star party, facing each other, calculators on hip, cowboy hats on head:  
**Pete:** "Jay, this town is too small for the both of us. You'll have to leave by astronomical twilight."  
**Jay:** "Pete, I'll meet you at high moon!"

"**I'm the cake monster!**"  
Gerry Rattley

"**Sorry to rain on your cake.**"  
Pete Manly

"**It can't be as bad as a military training film.**"  
Pete Manly

"**I was born at an early age.**"  
John Rhodes

---

2.

=== PAGE 3 ===
# COMET COMMENTS

Going into September, comet activity remains relatively low. Two comets are visible in the morning sky, and in the past month one faint periodic comet has been recovered.

**Comet Holmes (1979f):** This returning comet was recovered on July 20 at 19th magnitude by a team at Harvard Observatory's Agassiz station. It was first discovered Nov. 7, 1892, and has a period of 6.90 years. The closest it gets to the sun is 2.1 A.U.——it never gets closer than Mars. It is expected to remain quite faint.

**Comet Bradfield (1979c):** This comet is now in the morning sky, as it moves further from the sun and closer to the earth (closest on September 13). I observed it on Aug. 3, 4, and 5, and it was small, with no visible tail. An ephemeris follows.

**Comet Meier (1978f):** Now about four times further from the sun than we are, this comet is now a 12th magnitude object in the morning sky, nearing opposition on early September. An ephemeris follows

## Comet Bradfield (1979c)

| Date | R.A. (Hr.Min) | Dec. | Mag. |
|------|---------------|------|------|
| 08-23 | 06143 | 49deg55' | 10.0 |
| 08-27 | 06116 | 53   19 | 10.0 |
| 08-31 | 05134 | 57   10 | 10.0 |
| 09-04 | 04121 | 60   40 | 10.0 |
| 09-08 | 02127 | 60   41 | 9.9 |
| 09-12 | 00128 | 52   36 | 10.1 |
| 09-16 | 23108 | 38   08 | 10.4 |
| 09-20 | 22123 | 23   33 | 10.8 |
| 09-24 | 21156 | 12   19 | 11.4 |
| 09-28 | 21141 | 04   11 | 11.9 |

## Comet Meier (1978f)

| Date | R.A. | Dec. | Mag. |
|------|------|------|------|
| 08-25 | 23112 | -18deg34' | 11.8 |
| 09-04 | 23101 | -18   41 | 12.0 |
| 09-14 | 22151 | -18   39 | 12.2 |
| 09-24 | 22142 | -18   28 | 12.4 |

**Comet Tails:** Some people have asked me about Comet Machholz (1978i) recently. It is at the -46 declination, travelling from 21hr RA to 20hr RA this month. The nucleus is magnitude 21, the coma, if any. is still visible, is also very faint. On September 12, 1979, one year after discovery, it is 4.7 A.U. from the sun and 4.0 A.U. from the earth.

> Don Machholz  
> (356-7727)

3.

=== PAGE 4 ===
# SAQA

# occulting zone

## Grazes for September Travelers

September gives us two good grazes, unfortunately both at a considerable distance, and both during the week. This precludes my attendance at either event, but expeditions are planned by groups in the local areas. If you are able to observe, contact me for names of Fresno or Bakersfield leaders.

**Sep 5-6, 2:50 AM (Wed-Thur)** Near Fresno. During lunar eclipse! Moon will be 49% into the umbra, 38° elevation. The star is 10° from the lighted portion of the moon, which in turn is lighted by deep penumbra, so the 8.4 mag. star should be readily observed.

This graze is scientifically very important because it occurs at "full" moon. Usually grazes are impossible at this time. It is desirable to have graze data from all parts of the moon's orbit.

**Sep 11-12, 3:15 AM (Tue-Wed)** Near Bakersfield. The star is 1.1 mag Aldebaran! Ideal dark-sky conditions: moon 53% illuminated, 46° elevation, star 10° from lighted cusp. If not clouded out, this will be the graze of the decade. (See also below.)

There are numerous other expeditions planned nation-wide to observe grazes of Hyades stars on Sep 6, and also for Aldebaran on Sep 12, as mentioned in Sky & Telescope. I have the list of leaders for all of these too. If you will be elsewhere on these dates contact me to find out about these.

## Long-Range Forcasts

**Other grazes:** Most grazes for the rest of 1979 have some fatal flaw, often including weekday and/or distance. One in November might be observable; if a good site is available I will announce it in the October bulletin.

**Aldebaran:** Several grazes are predicted thru 1981, a few as close as Oregon and Washington. Then a 14-year wait for the next Aldebaran season.

**Minor Planets:** 1978 saw a dozen minor planets occult stars, several of them observed in the U.S., some by our own members. Many more are predicted for 1979, but none are observable in the U.S. Maybe 1980 will be better.

**Great Red Spot of Jupiter:** Recovery will be attempted in October, but probably November to see success. Predictions will likely be published in the December bulletin. If you observe mornings and would like to try recovering the Spot, see me; for search ephemerides.

Jim Van Nuland  
3509 Calico Avenue  
San Jose, Cal. 95124

Phone (408) 463-2077 weekdays, 9 AM - 4 PM  
" 371-1307 evenings, 7 PM - 11 PM

---

4.

=== PAGE 5 ===
# AN EASY AND ACCURATE METHOD OF POLAR ALIGNMENT

Several years ago I recieved the table included with this article from Dr. Gregory. I soon realized that by combining the information from the table with the setting circles on the telescope that I could do a very accurate polar alignment, quickly and easily. I have been using the following tecnique ever since and have found it to work very well.

I will assume that you have setting circles and that you can level your telescope and adjust it in latitude and azimuth. After setting up and leveling the telescope I point it approximately north. Next I raise the telescope in declination, toward the south, 9/10 of a degree. The Dec. circle now reads a little over 89 degrees.The next step is to set the R A circle with 0 hours at the upper meridian pointer on the mounting. 3 hours on the R A circle corresponds to eastern elongation (EE). Now I go to the table. Let's say that it is August 23 at 9 PM PDT. The table says that Polaris will be at EE at 10 PM PST which is 11 PM PDT. Polaris is therefore 2 hours before EE. I set the telescope to 2 hours on the R A circle and turn on the motor drive. ( Note that the telescope pointer will advance to where the 3 hour mark is, the EE point, in 2 hours. ) If I now bring Polaris into the center of the eyepiece without moving the telescope in R A or Dec. the scope should be polar aligned. I do this with the latitude and azimuth controls. 100 X mag. is enough.

I hope that some of you will try my method and find success with it. I will be glad to help anyone that would like assistance using it.

**By Bob Fingerhut**

[THIS IS FIGURE: A circular diagram showing the path of Polaris around the North Celestial Pole, with markers for UC, WE, LC, and EE positions, and a 9° angle marked to WE]

## CULMINATIONS & ELONGATIONS OF POLARIS 1967 LOCAL MEAN TIME

|        | 8 PM     | 9 PM    | 10 PM    | 11 PM   | MID-NIGHT | 1 AM    | 2 AM     | 3 AM     |
|--------|----------|---------|----------|---------|-----------|---------|----------|----------|
| UC     | Dec. 22  | Dec. 6  | Nov. 21  | Nov. 6  | Oct. 22   | Oct. 7  | Sept. 22 | Sept. 17 |
| WE     | Mar. 21  | Mar. 6  | Feb. 19  | Feb. 4  | Jan. 20   | Jan. 5  | Dec. 22  | Dec. 7   |
| LC     | June 22  | June 7  | May 22   | May 7   | Apr. 22   | Apr. 7  | Mar. 22  | Mar. 7   |
| EE     | Sept. 22 | Sept. 7 | Aug. 23  | Aug. 7  | July 23   | July 9  | June 23  | June 8   |

**Time of event for dates in between those shown in chart can be determined by subtracting 4m per day. For example, Upper Culmination, from the chart, occurs at 8:00 PM on Dec. 20. On Dec. 21 U.C. would occur at 7:56 and on Dec. 22 at 7:52, etc. The apparent position of Polaris for 1967 is as follows:**

**R.A. 1h01m    Dec. + 89°07'    Mag.: 2.1**

5

=== PAGE 6 ===
# The Finest Deep Sky Objects on the Skalnate Pleso Atlas of the Heavens Chart XI

**NGC 6891** RA (1950) dec Con SP:mag,size,type,dist
**20 12.8 +12 35 Aql pn: 11½(*11½); 0:2x0:1; IIa+IIb; 1740pc**
Planetary,stellar = 9½ mag: use moderate and high powers & good seeing!
**6905 20 20.2 +19 57 Del pn: 11½(*14½); 0:7x0:6; IIIa; 2190pc**
H.IV 19: very Remarkable,Planetary,Bright,pretty Small,Round,4 Small
stars near: locate with moderate power then view with high power; very
lovely sight nestled with a few pretty bright stars!

**6934 20 31.7 +07 14 Del gc: 9½; 1:5; VIII; 16½kpc**
H.I 103: Globular,Bright,Large,Round,resolvable,stars from mag 16 down,
9th mag star preceding: use moderate power.

**6881 20 50.7 -12 44 Aqr gc: 10; 2:0; IX; 18kpc**
M.72: Globular,pretty Bright,pretty Large,Round,gradually much Compressed
in the Middle,resolvable: use moderate power; stars extremely small.

**6994 20 56.4 -12 50 Aqr oc: 9½; 1'-4*; asterism**
M.73: Cluster,extremely Poor,very little Compression, no nebulosity:
this is not a real cluster; 4 stars, mags = 10, 10, 10 & 11.

**7006 20 59.1 +16 00 Del gc: 103; 1:1; I; 60kpc**
H.I 52: Bright,pretty Large,Round,gradually brighter in the Middle:
use moderate power; very distant and tightly compressed globular.

**7009 21 01.4 -11 34 Aqr pn: 8½(*11½); 0:7x0:4; IV+IIIa; 440pc**
H.I 1: extremely Remarkable,Planetary,very Bright,Small,elliptical:
"Saturn Nebula"; use moderate power to locate and high power to observe;
on nights of good seeing, look for the green disk, light-blue central
star, elliptical shape, and the two faint pointed extensions off the
long ends that gives this planetary its name; very pleasing sight!!!

**7078 21 27.6 +11 57 Peg gc: 6½; 7:4; IV; 15kpc**
M.15: Remarkable,Globular,very Bright,very Large,irregularly Round,
very suddenly much brighter in the Middle,resolvable,stars very Small:
use low and moderate powers; contains a planetary that is impossible
to view with amateur telescopes!

**7089 21 30.9 -01 03 Aqr gc: 6½; 8:2; II; 16kpc**
M.2: very Remarkable,Globular,Bright,very Large,gradually pretty much
brighter in the Middle,resolvable,stars extremely Small: use low and
moderate powers; fine binocular object!

**7448 22 57.6 +15 43 Peg eg: 11½; 2:0x1:0; Sc; 26Mpc**
H.II 251: pretty Bright,Large,Elongated in PA 173°,very gradually
brighter in the Middle,11th mag star 2:5 following: use moderate power.

**7479 23 02.4 +12 03 Peg eg: 11½; 3:4x2:6; SBb; 26Mpc**
H.I 55: pretty Bright,considerably Large,much Elongated in PA 12°,
between 2 stars: use moderate power and dark sky; very diffuse & knotty.

**7492 23 05.7 -15 54 Aqr gc: 12½; 3:5; XII; 29kpc**
H.III 558: extremely Faint,Large,between 2 Double stars: not an object
for a beginner; use low power and a dark sky.

**7606 23 16.5 -08 46 Aqr eg: 11½; 4:4x1:5; Sb; 25Mpc**
H.I 104: pretty Faint,considerably Large,pretty much Elongated in PA 0°±:
use low power and dark skies; several small stars superimposed.

**7619 23 17.8 +07 55 Psc eg: 11½; 1:0x0:9; E1; 40Mpc**
H.II 439: considerably Bright,pretty Small,Round,pretty suddenly
brighter in the Middle: use moderate power; NGC 7626 close following.

**7626 23 18.2 +07 56 Psc eg: 11½; 1:0x0:8, E2p; 36Mpc**
H.II 440: considerably Bright,pretty Small,Round,pretty suddenly
brighter in the Middle: use moderate power; NGC 7619 close preceding.

**7727 23 37.3 -12 34 Aqr eg: 11; 2:7; Irr(S?); 20Mpc**
H.I 111: pretty Bright,pretty Large,irregularly Round,much brighter
in the Middle: use moderate power; NGC 7723 south preceding ½° is
H.I 110, an 11½ mag spiral of 2' diameter.

**Dark Skies;** *[handwritten signature]*

=== PAGE 7 ===
# SAN JOSE' ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIP LIST—September, 1979

| NAME | ADDRESS | CITY | ZIP | PHONE |
|------|---------|------|-----|-------|
| AMBROSE, DAVE | 1720 WALNUT ST | EL CERRITO | 94530 | 233-5468 |
| BARRETT, RICHARD | 1520 SANTA MARIA | SAN JOSE | 95125 | 264-4320 |
| BELL, TRUDY E | SUITE 14W W 11 RIVERSIDE DR N.Y.,N.Y. | | 10023 | 874-4025 |
| BELLEVILLE, LOGAN M | 1457 EVANS LN | SARATOGA | 95070 | 379-4089 |
| BENASSAI, BRUNO | 475 CUMULUS #35 | SUNNYVALE | 94087 | 733-9154 |
| BENSON, ROBERT | 3424 NOTRE DAME DR | SANTA CLARA | 95051 | 247-9260 |
| BLOECHL, WAYNE | 1476 ALPINE ST | SANTA CLARA | 95051 | 241-5532 |
| BOWER, VON D | P. O. BOX 1209 | MOUNTAIN VIEW | 94042 | |
| BOWES, JOHN D | 1056 MILLER AVE | SAN JOSE | 95129 | |
| BRANIFF, FRED | 814 S SARATOGA AVE | SAN JOSE | 95129 | 249-4019 |
| BRIDGE, RALPH | 10395 JUDY AVE | CUPERTINO | 95014 | 252-9396 |
| BUETTNER, DOUGLAS H | 6659 MT PAKRON DR | SAN JOSE | 95120 | 997-1783 |
| CALDWELL, ROBERT B | 1590 PEACOCK AVE | SUNNYVALE | 94087 | 245-3762 |
| CARLSON, BRAD | 6874 TRINIDAD DR | SAN JOSE | 95120 | 268-1580 |
| CINCOTTA, JOHN | 1720 HALFORD #332 | SANTA CLARA | 95051 | |
| CIRODE, TONY | 1481 DE ROSE WAY #130 | SAN JOSE | 95126 | 286-4155 |
| CISNEROS, EUGENE L | 15840 E ALTA VISTA WAY | SAN JOSE | 95127 | 923-6800 |
| COOK, GEORGE R | 905 SEENA AVE | LOS ALTOS | 94022 | 961-1577 |
| COTTON, RON | 1135 DWYER AVE | SAN JOSE | 95120 | |
| CUNHA, RON | 15995 WARDS FERRY RD | SONORA | 95370 | |
| CUNNINGHAM, RANDY | 261 WASHINGTON #4 | SANTA CLARA | 95050 | 985-8334 |
| DEGRAFF, BRUCE&MARIA | 7130 POINT DUNES CT | SAN JOSE | 95139 | 224-0972 |
| DELANEY, JOHN | 2410 WOODLAND AVE | SAN JOSE | 95128 | 296-8559 |
| DEJONG, LES | 2951 POSTWOOD DR | SAN JOSE | 95132 | 263-4612 |
| FRANK DIBBELL | 710 GEORGIA AVE | SUNNYVALE | 94086 | 733-7208 |
| EDWARDS, TOM | 1182 ORANDANO CT | SUNNYVALE | 94087 | 736-8550 |
| FAUST, JOE | 11891 BROOKRIDGE DR | SARATOGA | 95070 | 252-5310 |
| FINGERHUT, BOB | 340 RIO VERDE PL #4 | MILPITAS | 95035 | 263-4455 |
| GINFLE, H WILLIAM | 1486 MEDALLION DR | SAN JOSE | 95120 | 268-7967 |
| GLASSPOOL, RICHARD | 18671 PRING CT | CUPERTINO | 95014 | 996-8293 |
| GLEASON, JOHN | 2655 KEYSONE AVE #20 | SANTA CLARA | 95051 | 241-1058 |
| GORZOLLA, YORK R | 1635 EL DORADO AVE | SAN JOSE | 95126 | 247-3590 |
| GREGORY, MRS A B | 5480 FAIRWAY DR | SAN JOSE | 95127 | 258-6095 |
| HANISCH, WOLFGANG | 1815 CLEVELAND AVE | SAN JOSE | 95126 | 998-1861 |
| HANSEN, RONALD L | 10941 MIGUELITA RD | SAN JOSE | 95127 | 258-0449 |
| HATCHER, ROBERT | 1449 BEN ROE AVE | LOS ALTOS | 94022 | 961-9383 |
| HERMSMEYER, PHIL | 20900 ALVES DR | CUPERTINO | 95014 | 252-5529 |
| HERSCHKORN, JOHN | 1265 ECHO VALLEY DR | SAN JOSE | 95120 | 997-0454 |
| HOLLAND, FREDERIC G | 17345 GROSVENOR CT | MONTE SERENO | 95030 | |
| HOWELL, JERRY | 1489 SAN MARCOS DR | SAN JOSE | 95132 | 258-3312 |
| HUTCHENS, DIANE L | 3942 VIA MILANO | CAMPBELL | 95008 | |
| JONES, CLIFFORD D | 1507 LYLE DR | SAN JOSE | 95129 | 743-2398 |
| KENNEDY, PETER | 916 PASCOE AVE | SAN JOSE | | 269-4806 |
| KOLLER, DAVID V | 7776 HAZELNUT PL | NEWARK | 94560 | 797-8865 |
| LO, JEFFERY | 4090 CRANFORD CIRCLE | SAN JOSE | 95124 | 377-3139 |
| LOGS, JIM | 13680 ROSSMERE CT | SARATOGA | 95070 | 867-1264 |
| LOWD, RALPH&SUZANNE | 3387 KENNETH DR | PALO ALTO | 94303 | 494-6034 |
| MACHHOLZ, DON | 34-B FILLMER AVE | LOS GATOS | 95030 | 356-7727 |
| MAIM, ROBERT S | 299 LANGTON AVE | LOS ALTOS | 94022 | 941-1343 |
| MAPLES, DONALD O | 3109 KERMATH DR | SAN JOSE | 95132 | 262-1736 |
| MARTIN, RONNIE | 1310 PERALTA CT | SAN JOSE | 95120 | 268-0544 |
| MCPEAK, WILLIAM L | 4563 GRIMSBY DR | SAN JOSE | 95130 | 379-2071 |
| MEDLOCK, KEVIN&DENTI | 16105 VIA PARO | SAN LORENZO | 94580 | 278-8475 |
| MEYER, ALLAN | 248-1 AMES RES. CTR | MOFFETT FIELD | 94035 | |
| MIRM, RITA | 7764 HAZELNUT PL | NEWARK | 94560 | 797-9916 |
| MOORE, DEBBIE | 5336 HARWOOD RD | SAN JOSE | 95124 | 269-7466 |
| NAFARRATE, ANTONIO | 343 PARK HILL DR | MILPITAS | 95035 | 263-5415 |

7.

=== PAGE 8 ===
```markdown
| NEINCHEL, NORMAN | 190 ROSE CT | CAMPBELL | 95008 | 378-4488 |
| OLLINS, RICHARD | 2479 AMARYL DR | SAN JOSE | 95132 | 259-0270 |
| PAGE, RICHARD | 14896 STANDISH DR | SAN JOSE | 95124 | |
| PALMER, TOM A | 2452 WESTGATE AVE | SAN JOSE | 95125 | |
| PERRY, CARLTON J | 273 N KING RD | SAN JOSE | 95116 | 291-9122 |
| PIINI, ERNEST W | 1356 LONGFELLOW WY | SAN JOSE | 95129 | 252-3609 |
| PINHEIRO, CATHY | 4029 WILL ROGERS DR #26 SAN JOSE | | 95117 | 248-0210 |
| PINSCHMIDT, PENNY | 16385 PEACOCK LN | LOS GATOS | 95030 | 356-4330 |
| PRATT, CHRIS&SHEA | 474 SAFARI DR | SAN JOSE | 95123 | 629-2994 |
| PRATT, DAVID K II | 3059 ALVIENA DR | SAN JOSE | 95133 | 258-5831 |
| RATTLEY, GERALD W | 185 HOMESTEAD RD #2 | SUNNYVALE | 94087 | 732-0202 |
| RHODES, JOHN D | 1812 NE 25th ST | VANCOUVER WASH 98664 | | |
| RICE, GARY&DICKIE | 1833 REDWOOD AVE | REDWOOD CITY | 94061 | 366-6705 |
| RIVERA, THOMAS JR | 1328 OLD PARK PL | SAN JOSE | 95132 | 251-4524 |
| ROACH, CARL O | 6663 MT FOREST DR | SAN JOSE | 95120 | |
| ROTH, JAMES P | 5964 GARCES AVE | SAN JOSE | 95123 | |
| SCHELL, ED | P O BOX 1345 | LOS GATOS | 95030 | 356-7498 |
| SCHOENDOBR, WALT J | 1390 MARKET ST #2019 | SAN FRANCISCO | 94109 | |
| SEGEL, RICHARD H | 5450 MONTEREY RD #47 | SAN JOSE | 95111 | 578-8825 |
| THERKELSEN, DR ROBERT | 2941 PLEASURE PT DR | SANTA CRUZ | 95062 | 475-3673 |
| VAN NULAND, JAMES | 3509 CALICO AVE | SAN JOSE | 95124 | 371-1307 |
| VOSS, DR VIRGIL&LORRAINE 14982 SOBY RD | | SARATOGA | 95070 | 354-9904 |
| WAKEMAN, DONALD E | 1486 BLACKHAWK CT | SUNNYVALE | 94087 | 245-6366 |
| WEBSTER, LARRY | 5291 ELROSE AVE | SAN JOSE | 95124 | 267-4133 |
| WELCH, SHERI | 1044 FLEETWOOD DR | SAN JOSE | 95120 | 268-5502 |
| WILD, NORMAN D | 7557 ORANGE BLOSSOM DR CUPERTINO | | 95014 | 252-8966 |
| ZEIDERS, JACK M | 2961 MAGLIOCCO DR # 3 SAN JOSE | | 95128 | 246-6189 |

## BULLETIN SUBSCRIBERS

| ASPEY, S A | 12421 LOLLY CT | SARATOGA | 95070 | 996-8670 |
| BADSTUBNER, BOB | 1901 HALFORD AVE #27 | SANTA CLARA | 95051 | |
| BLACK, ROBERT H | 585 DARTMOUTH | SAN CARLOS | 94070 | 592-2166 |
| CHERRINGTON, WILLIAM J | 367 21st AVE | SAN FRANCISCO | 94121 | 752-9420 |
| CLEMENT, JOHN | 2030 GORDON AVE | MENLO PARK | 94025 | 854-3538 |
| FASH, HERMAN | 144 EDDY ST | SAN FRANCISCO | 94102 | |
| FOJO, MANUEL | 258 THOMPSON AVE | MOUNTAIN VIEW | 94040 | 967-0288 |
| FREEMAN, JAY | 2721 HILLCGASSS | BERKELEY | 94705 | 548-6591 |
| MANLY, PETER L | 621 CORNELIA CT | MOUNTAIN VIEW | 94040 | 965-8357 |
| PETERSEN, JACK | 1840 YOSEMITE DR | MILPITAS | 95035 | 262-1457 |
| SCHALCK, ROBERT E | 2751 MONUMENT BLVD #222 CONCORD | | 94520 | 682-6302 |
| TINNERELL, SAM | 1028 ZAMORA DR | PACIFICA | 94044 | |
| TRAVIS, PAUL | P O BOX 60673 | SUNNYVALE | 94086 | |
| TURNER, CHARLES W | 245 8th AVE | SAN FRANCISCO | 94111 | |
```

=== PAGE 9 ===
# SJAA MEMBER'S CORNER by Frank Dibbell

The first club member to be spotlighted this month is PhilErmanasyer. Phil tells me that his interest in astronomy goes back to his junior high school years, where one of his teachers sparked his interest in the subject. He pursued it avidly and enthusiastically in high school (according to Phil, anyway!) the teacher later had to teach an astronomy section of his science class at Collins Junior High School in Cupertino.

While in high school, Phil boasts of getting his biology teacher turned on to astronomy. As the story goes, there was this disassembled telescope at school, and the biology teacher asked Phil if he could make it work. At soon as Phil got the scope together, he explained to his teacher how it worked. The biology teacher was so impressed that he was instantly converted, and joined the San Jose Astronomical Association. To return the favor, the afore-mentioned biology teacher then introduced Phil to the SJAA. (For 10 points, who is the biology teacher? For 25 points, what was a telescope doing in a biology class?)

Phil's experience in astronomy since becoming an amateur includes giving planetarium shows at both Foothill and De Anza Colleges, and also at the Rosicrucian Planetarium. He currently owns an 8 inch Newtonian, and has plans to build a larger scope. An avid observer, his ambition is to learn the night sky as well as Gerry Rattley does.

In the fall, Phil will be studying Oceanography at UC Santa Cruz, but for now, he describes himself as a "self-made flunky".

The second club member interviewed this month is one of the original club members, Gene Clemence. Actually, Gene says that he was a member for only about a year back in 1975, and then dropped out of the club. He has only been really active as a club member for about the last year.

Gene describes himself as a gadget freak. He enjoys building telescopes, drive correctors, automatic star trackers, and any other electronic phenomena that can be applied to a telescope. As well as being an engineer in Nuclear Instrumentation at work, Gene is also an authorized Celestron dealer. He enjoys selling telescopes for two main reasons: it allows him to associate a lot with other astronomically-minded people, and he gets to play with the equipment. However working full-time at SLAC and in the evenings with the Cupertino starship cuts in to his observing, which Gene admitted is a drawback.

One of Gene's ambitions is to apply his skills at electronic gadgetry to build and market the "Complete Telescope". When asked if he wanted to become the Roger Tuthill of the West Coast, he replied, "Yes, except my stuff will work". Currently, Gene enjoys talking to people about astronomy and telescopes. If anyone has any questions about their own telescope, or are thinking about buying one and have questions about comparing the different kinds on the market, talk to Gene at any general meeting or indoor star party.

---

# ASTRO*NORTHWEST—1979 by Denni Medlock

This year the Western Amateur Astronomers' conference was sponsored by the Portland Astronomical Society and was ran jointly with the Astronomical League and the Association of Lunar and Planetary Observers. Held on the University of Portland campus Aug. 15-19 the conference covered a mixture of topics through the many amateur and professional talks spread over Thursday, Friday, and Saturday. During the Planetary Exploration session Friday SJAA's Don Machholz gave an excellent and often time humorous description of the discovery of Comet Machholz. (In the schedule it was listed as: Comet Wanchhloz.....by Don Manchholz). Dan Lester of Lick Obs. spoke on recent new theories on star formation, and Ben Casados, public education director at JPL, brought the latest motion pictures and slides from Voyager's Jupiter encounter. Well worth the 50¢ admission, just for that. Administrative talks included B.E. Meyers on image intensifiers now available to the amateur, and Del Wiseman spoke on replicators, devices which let you view slides using your telescope. Great for when it's cloudy, and fairly realistic! I even viewed the Sombrero Galaxy through a 14″ in the afternoon and had to remind myself that it wasn't really there.

Two awards were given at the banquet Friday night: one, the ASP amateur achievement in astronomy award, presented to Harry Gee for his co-discovery of a satellite around the asteroid Herculina; and the other was the N.A.A.'s G. Bruce Blair Award, this year given to Chabot Observatory's Kingsley Michman, who gave a good slide show on the Science Center during his acceptance speech. There were about 20 Bay Areans in the 200+ people there. From the SJAA were Don Machholz, Gerry Rattley, Kevin and myself, and Patty Winter, who's not a member but might as well be for all the club activities she attends. Harry and Marion Leitner, the Terry Termans, and Ken Wilson from the Morrison Planetarium were some of the others making the trip.

Organizationally, it was obvious the conference was the Portland society's first with some mixups in the time schedule for the speakers, and with the display room locked during the paper sessions we were virtually a captive audience. The facilities were good, though expensive, and the food very edible,(we ate, and we ate,), so all in all the conference was worth the effort.

The weather was a hinderance for the most part (I think Oregon's state color is gray) with overcast, muggy skies most of the time. A slight clearing Friday night sent the SJAA people scrambling for their telescopes and with a dozen other local astronomers spent the night at Crow Pt, an area thirty miles east of Portland, for a fairly cecent star party. I didn't go. I spent the night taking eclipse trips in the residence hall's lobby with Joe Palmeri, president of the Seattle club, and Ken Wilson. On Saturday night, the scheduled night for the star party at Prillum Lake, 59 miles east of Portland, it rained. But we went anyhow, of course. Kevin and Don didn't bother setting up their 'scopes but there were probably a good fifteen instruments already there. (It was pouring!), some with observers attached. (That's where the Sombrero comes in ail)

Interesting things discovered while at the conference:

1) The sun is a deep-sky object in Portland.
2) If you're an observational astronomer, don't move north.
3) The green flash can also occur at sunrise. (See Observations for details)
4) At the 1976 conference in Boulder, Colorado, there was also a street lighting convention going on at the same time on the campus.
5) The best bakery in Portland is Rose's.

=== PAGE 10 ===
# SKYWORD PUZZLE #4 by Fred Braniff

## Across

1. Power
6. Eyepiece
8. Type of galaxy
10. Newtonian
14. Sun
15. Curve part
17. Double in Aries
18. Did you see one yet?
19. Just below Orion
20. Young Moon
21. 18 49 +3310
22. Closest star
23. Mothers astronomer
25. Epsilon Tauri
26. One of Jupiters

## Down

1. Comet hunter (1730-1817)
2. Could be the optic one
3. Mizar's companion
4. One of Saturns
5. The Gegenschein
7. Hoots
9. Can extend across the solar disk
11. Bright patches near Sun's limb
12. Type of binary
13. Star named by Copernicus
15. Also named Rescha, Kaitain
16. 15 27 +29 12
17. Zeta Pegasi
24. Published in 1888

---

Question of the Month for September is now the Question of the Month for October: If you could go anywhere in the galaxy you wanted to, where would you go? Yes, round trip....

---

"Give me a pencil....I want to make an enemies list."
Frank Dibbell

"That was the first time I've ever seen the sun set from left to right."
anonymous description of the fog, Fremont Peak, July 21

"Everybody look straight at him so you don't ruin your averted vision."
Don Machholz at the Crow's Pt, Or. star party during group photo session

"When you've decided to throw in the towel and leave can I use it to dry off?"
Don Machholz, Trillium Lake, Or., star party

I know...this is a six page bulleti

10.

=== PAGE 11 ===
# SAN JOSE TO PESCADERO (HALF MOON BAY)(GEOLOGICAL) (SOUTH HALF, SANTA CLARA-SAN MATEO COUNTIES, CALIFORNIA) SAN JOSE QUADRANGLE. 15'. SERIES. MAP NO. 1 (GEOLOGIC)

## LOG OF TRIP TO OLD QUARTZ QUARRY, TO SAN JOSE TO MOUNT HAMILTON ROAD. THENCE TO HALLS VALLEY TO MOUNT HAMILTON

0.0 LEAVING POST OFFICE ON FIRST ST.
0.5 RIGHT ANGLE TURN TO RIGHT ON SANTA CLARA ST.
0.7 LEFT TURN ON ALIMADEN ROAD.
1.2 CROSS S.P.R.R. ALMADEN SPRINGS TO LEFT.
1.7 CROSS ALMADEN CREEK. VICHY SPRINGS TO RIGHT.
2.3 CROSS CROSS ROAD. MT. HAMILTON ROAD TO MT. HAMILTON OBSERVATORY.
2.8 CROSS VICHY SPRINGS ROAD.
3.5 CROSS ALMADEN CREEK.
4.2 CROSS ALMADEN CREEK.
5.0 VICHY SPRINGS PICNIC GROUNDS, STOP, FILL GAS.
5.5 CROSS GUADALUPE CREEK.
6.0 TO RIGHT FORK TO ALMADEN.
6.5 TURN LEFT TO OLD VICHY SPRINGS.
7.0 STRAIGHT AHEAD.
7.5 CROSS LOS ALAMITOS CREEK.
8.3 PECK HOUSE.
8.5 CROSS GUADELUPE CREEK.
9.5 LEFT FORK UP CREEK TOWARD ALMADEN ON NEW ROAD.
10.0 CROSS ALAMITOS CREEK. ALMADEN SPRINGS TO LEFT.
10.5 CROSS ALAMITOS CREEK.
11.0 CROSS ALAMITOS CREEK.
11.7 STRAIGHT AHEAD TO HALLS VALLEY.
12.5 CROSS ALMADEN CREEK.
13.0 LEFT TO MT. HAMILTON.
13.5 ALMADEN MILL.
14.0 CROSS GUADALUPE CREEK.
14.5 STRAIGHT AHEAD.
15.0 CROSS GUADALUPE CREEK.
15.5 CROSS GUADALUPE CREEK. SANTA ISABEL QUICKSILVER MINES ON BOTH SIDES OF ROAD. MINE WORKINGS ON LEFT SIDE OF ROAD.
16.0 CROSS GUADALUPE CREEK.
16.5 CROSS SANTA ISABEL CREEK.
17.5 CROSS SANTA ISABEL CREEK.
18.0 CROSS MT. HAMILTON ROAD. TO LEFT UP MT. HAMILTON. TO RIGHT UP SAN JOSE-MT. HAMILTON ROAD.
18.5 CROSS GUADALUPE CREEK, SMITH CREEK ROAD TO LEFT.
19.0 CROSS SMITH CREEK.
19.5 BEAR TO RIGHT UP CREEK.
20.0 CROSS SMITH CREEK.
20.5 CROSS SMITH CREEK.
21.0 CROSS SMITH CREEK.
21.5 CROSS SMITH CREEK.
22.0 CROSS SMITH CREEK.
22.5 RIGHT FORK TO RIDGE (METCALF).
23.0 LEFT FORK.
23.5 CROSS CREEK. ISABEL MINES ROAD TO LEFT.
24.0 STRAIGHT AHEAD.
24.5 CROSS CREEK.
25.0 CROSS CREEK.
25.5 BEAR TO RIGHT UP RIDGE TOWARD MT. HAMILTON.
26.0 CROSS CREEK.
26.5 CROSS CREEK.
27.0 CROSS CREEK.
27.5 LEFT FORK.
28.0 BEAR TO LEFT.
28.5 BEAR TO RIGHT.
29.0 BEAR TO LEFT (LICK).
29.5 BEAR TO LEFT.
30.0 CROSS CREEK.
30.5 STRAIGHT AHEAD. ALMADEN ROAD TO RIGHT.
31.0 BEAR TO LEFT.
31.5 CROSS CREEK.
32.0 BEAR TO LEFT.
32.5 MT. HAMILTON JUNCTION. STRAIGHT AHEAD TO LIVERMORE. RIGHT TO SAN JOSE VIA MT. HAMILTON ROAD. PICNIC GROUNDS AT ISABEL CREEK.
32.8 BEAR TO LEFT.
33.0 CROSS ISABEL CREEK.
33.5 BEAR TO LEFT UP ISABEL CREEK TO ISABEL MINE.
34.0 BEAR TO RIGHT UP CREEK (NORTH).
34.5 CROSS ISABEL CREEK.
35.0 CROSS ISABEL CREEK.
35.5 CROSS ISABEL CREEK. ISABEL MINE TO LEFT.
36.0 TO BEAR CREEK FLAT UP CALAVERAS CREEK, ONE MORE MILE TO ISABEL MINE AND END OF ROAD.
LITTLE COYOTE CREEK ENTERS ISABEL CREEK FROM RIGHT AT THIS POINT (ISABEL MINE).
LITTLE COYOTE CREEK CAN BE FOLLOWED UP SIDE OF MT. HAMILTON TO SUMMIT (CALAVERAS RESERVOIR CAN BE REACHED FROM HERE ON TRAIL. LITTLE COYOTE CREEK CAN BE FOLLOWED TO A POINT JUST SOUTH OF CALAVERAS CREEK, FROM WHERE A TRAIL RUNS ALONG SOUTH SIDE OF CALAVERAS RESERVOIR TO CALAVERAS DAM, A DISTANCE OF ABOUT 1.5 MI.)
ISABEL CREEK CAN BE FOLLOWED UP TRAIL ABOUT 3 MI. TO HEAD (SOURCE), FROM HERE SAN ANTONIO VALLEY CAN BE REACHED AND SAN ANTONIO CREEK FOLLOWED TO SAN ANTONIO VALLEY. FROM SAN ANTONIO VALLEY TRAIL RUNS ALONG NORTH SIDE OF MT. HAMILTON TO MT. HAMILTON OBSERVATORY.
NOTE: THE ROADS BEYOND MT. HAMILTON ROAD ON SCALE BEYOND MT. HAMILTON ROAD ARE SHOWN ON SCALE SHOWN ON SMALLER SCALED MAP AND AS SUCH SHOULD BE REGARDED AS APPROX.