=== PAGE 1 ===
# SAN JOSE AMATEUR ASTRONOMERS
# BULLETIN
**AUGUST 1996**

**Bob Malm, Editor**
**(941-1343)**

## SJAA Officers

**President:** Tom Mungall 257-3262  
**Vice-president:** Brian Day 266-8690  
**Treasurer:** Jerry Rattley 732-0202  
**Secretary:** Norman Wild 252-8966

**Board Members:** Dave Erickson, Tom Curtis, Al.B. Gregory, Jim Van Nuland, Jim Vermilion.

---

## RECENT ACTIVITIES:

On July 13, thirty members and guests attended the installation picnic and star party at Levin Park, Milpitas. After enjoying the Mungall bar-bacued chicken, the officers were installed. While the picnic was an unqualified success, the star party produced mixed reactions. Conditions were wet and the sky was erratic. The consensus of opinion indicates that of the "big four" observing sites, Levin Park places fourth. The highlight of the evening (no pun intended) was the observation of possible fireball by Norm Wild, Jim Van Nuland, Jerry Rattley and others. The position, speed and general description, however, indicates that it was probably a recently launched rocket.

On July 20, twenty-three members and guests enjoyed a very successful star party at Henry Coe State Park. The weather was warm enough to be pleasant but not to the extent that significant atmospheric turbulance was produced. The only condition to mar the otherwise perfect seeing was a fifteen mile per hour breeze. Those telescopes which were not "wind-resistant" produced images which were hard on the eyes. Fortunately the breeze lessened at the evening progressed and most of the viewers found protected observing spots.

By 4 A.M. when the Zodiacal lights and the rising of Venus signaled the imminence of dawn, the peristent ones finally retired. Interesting objects whichhad been observed included many of the clusters of the Scorpius-Saggitarius region, the nearby galaxies M 31*and M 33*, a more distant though bright galaxy in Scuptor, NGC 253, the **Helical** planetary nebula in Aquarius, NGC 7293, the **Veil** nebula in Cygnus, NGC 6992-5 and the **California** nebula in Perseus, NGC 1499. Yours truly observed the North America*and*Pelican nebulas in Cygnus for the first time, in binoculars.

Interesting equipment used during the night included the long-awaited Wright-Schmidt of Dave Erickson, Jim Vermilion's 15" fork-mount and Don Alber's "Redwood Special."

Yours truly was the only one foolish enough to attempt astrophotography, taking a couple of wobbley'piggy-back' shots of the Scorpius-Sagittarius region.

---

## COMING EVENTS:

**August 2 (Friday):** General meeting at the Community Bank. Jerry Rattley will talk on galaxies, after which *8PM* the meeting will be thrown open for general discussion on topics of interest.

**August 17 (Saturday):** Overnight star party at ~~Fremont Park~~ **Coe Park**. Come and take advantage of the new moon which occurs on this date.

**August 24 (Saturday):** Public star party at the K Mart on the west side of the valley, Bollinger and Highway 9. More information on this in the next bulletin.

**September 6 (Friday):** General meeting at the Community Bank.

**September 13 (Friday):** Board meeting at Dave Erickson's residence.

**September 14 (Saturday):** Star party at the Skyline site.

**September 28 (Saturday):** Public star party at the K Mart in Santa Clara, El Camino Real and Lawrence Expressway.

---

**REQUEST:** If you have any information which you feel should be included in the Bulletin, please call me at 941-1343.

---

*The former could be seen more extensively than usual and some viewers could see spiral structure in the latter.