=== PAGE 1 ===
# SAN JOSE AMATEUR ASTRONOMERS

## Officers
**Pres. Dr. A.B. Gregory** 258-6095  
**Vice Pres.Tom Mungall** 257-3262  
**Treasurer, Jim Eckendorf** 225-3532  
**Secretary/Bull Ed. Norm Wild** 252-8966

## Board Members
Jerry Rattley  
Emmet Murphy  
Brian Day  
Jim Van Nuland

Fred Drinkwater  
Tom Wurtis  
Dave Erickson

## Bulletin for August and September, 1973

Because of vacation, a single bulletin will be used to cover the month's of August and September.

**Banquet:** The annual banquet was held at the Royal Fork Restaurant, July 15th. Over sixty members and guests attended. Dr. Gregory introduced the officers and board members for the next year (listed above). He also gave a brief resume of the year's activities; the two high points were the public Astronomy Day star party in April, in which the club had telescopes set up at Eastridge and K Mart shopping centers, and progress on the 12½ inch reflector.

Ernie Piini was the guest speaker. He showed slides of the African eclipse as well as the natives and scenery of Akjoujt, Mauritania. He also presented to Dr. Gregory for the club's archives, two eclipse commemorative stamps and a vial of Sahara Desert sand.

**August 3rd.** General meeting at Community Bank. A short talk by Dave Erickson re: "Telescope Nomenclature" will be a prelude to his October talk on Schmidt cameras and telescopes. He will be followed by the main speaker, Frank Miller, who will show slides of the eclipse expedition from a ship off the coast of Morocco.

**August 24-25th.** Star party, Henry Coe State Park. Stay one or both nights if you wish. Turn left on Dunne St. at Morgan Hill. The park is located beyond Anderson Reservoir. Nominal Camp fee.

**August 10th.** Board meeting, Community Bank.

*

**September 7th.** General meeting at Community Bank. This will be an equipment night, the same type of program we had last March. If you have any equipment that you would like to bring to the meeting, please do. It does not have to be home made, it the recent Telescope Makers Conference in Idyllwild Dave Erickson and Tom Mungall received certificates for the equipment they displayed at the March program. Incidentally you can see their equipment in the July Sky and Telescope, P. 29, which shows a picture of Dave standing beside the display table. Also, if you wish to trade or sell equipment, eyepieces, etc bring them to the meeting.

**September 8th and 9th.** AANC Conference, Lawrence Hall of Science, Berkeley. Hours are: 1 to 10 Saturday, and 1 to 5 Sunday.

**September 14th.** Board Meeting, Jim Van Nuland's home. 3509 Calico Dr., San Jose.

**September 21-22nd.** Star party, Mt. Madonna State Park. Like the one in August, stay one or both nights. Turn west of Gilroy on Hecker Pass Rd. A nominal fee is charged.

The San Jose Amateur Astronomers will have a public star party early in October. More news about that later.

Several telescopes at Lick Observatory on Mt. Hamilton will be used for public viewing of the heavens through September 7th. An added feature will be a talk by the astronomer on duty about the different kinds of research being conducted at Lick. There is no charge, but reservations are necessary. All tickets are limited to six per family. If interested, write:

> Visitor Program  
> Lick Observatory  
> Mt. Hamilton, Ca. 95140

Be sure to state first and second choices for a Friday night. A self addressed envelope should accompany each request. The observatory will be open from 7:30 to 10:30 pm.

**Note:** This will be the last bulletin for past members who have not rejoined for 1973-74. If you wish to join, send membership and Dues to Tom Sky and Telescope, to Jim Eckendorf, 60 Azucar Ave., San Jose, Ca. 95111. Dues are $12.00 for adults; $10.00 if under 18.

*

So that the SJAA can better serve its members, an interest questionaire has been devised by Tom Mungall . It will be handed out at future meetings. It will only take a few minutes to complete.