=== PAGE 1 ===
# SAN JOSE AMATEUR ASTRONOMERS, INC.
## MONTHLY BULLETIN
### AUGUST, 1971

**PRES:** Dave Erickson 269-4838  
**VICE-PRES:** Tom Halliday 296-3169  
**SEC:** Jerry Rattley  
**TREAS:** Emmet Murphy 287-6378

## BOARD OF DIRECTORS

- 71-73 Dave Ambrose (Occultations) 269-8262
- 71-73 Trudy E. Bell (East Coast) 244-1096
- 70-72 Ralph Bridge 252-9396
- 70-72 Dick Glasspool (bulletin) 886-8843
- 71-73 Dr. A. B. Gregory 258-6095
- 70-72 Greg Nichols 264-7724
- 70-72 Bruce Smith (librarian & observatory) 244-6769
- 71-73 Don Summers (observatory) 296-1766
- 71-73 Norman Wild 252-9966

## JULY 24 - OVERNIGHT STARPARTY

Henry Coe State Park will be the next Saturday evening starparty site. Ranger Strauss will be on duty that weekend and will be collecting a $1.50 per vehicle and campsite. Additional cars per same campsite will be $1.00. The campsite area is small (park is big), and Emmet, who is coordinating the event, believes they only have six or so sites. The park is typically not crowded. Money can be saved by doubling up on cars and campsites, so call Emmet at 287-6378 Wednesday night or during the day on Thursday, Friday or Saturday. He cannot be reached Thursday or Friday nights but will coordinate rides (or cancellation) at the other times.

Directions to Henry Coe State Park:

Drive to Morgan Hill. Turn left at East Dunne (third stop light). Drive 14 miles east (allow plenty of time) to the park at roads end, crossing Anderson Dam on the way.

## JULY 31 - OVERNIGHT STARPARTY

The Saturday night event will be at the SJAA Observatory site beginning at dusk. Emmet again has offered to coordinate the event and can be contacted at 287-6378.

## AUGUST 3 - REGULAR MEETING

DATE & TIME - Friday, August 6, 8 p.m.  
LOCATION - Community Bank, 111 W. St. John St., 2nd floor  
Executive Conference Room (enter the bank from the rear)

Trudy E. Bell will present a talk entitled "Are You Sure This is the Right Star? (Or Avoiding Angry Neighbors, Vicious Dogs, and Wary Cops While Making Like a Professional)".

=== PAGE 2 ===
# Page 2

You guessed it; the topic is on grazes and occultations, and Trudy will be presenting (in a humorous nature) the observing techniques, present uses, and history behind grazes and occultations. Results of the July 4 graze (not at Candlestick Park) will also be included.

In addition, a possible film may be available by the August meeting. Do come and discuss the results of the many starparties throughout June and July.

## AUGUST 13 - PLANNING MEETING -

The meeting will be held at Tom Halliday's, 489 S. Genevieve Lane, San Jose (296-3169). The meeting will establish the fall and winter calendars. Also, the major effort to be expended on the observatory will be outlined.

## AUGUST 21 - OVERNIGHT STARPARTY (FOR THOSE NOT HOLDING LUAUS)

The Saturday night event will be at the SJAA observatory site beginning at dusk. Dave will coordinate and can be reached at 269-4338.

## AUGUST 24-26 - WAA CONVENTION IN HAWAII

Contact Dave (269-4338) for last minute details.

## AUGUST 27 - PUBLIC STARPARTY

The previous public starparty was clouded over. SJAA will be sponsoring another on a Friday night at the Skyline Site. Each member is urged to attend and display their equipment.

## AUGUST 28 - MOONWATCH

On this weekend, everyone is urged to attend the public starparty on Friday; those who cannot make Friday's event due to circumstances beyond their control can possibly make Saturday's moonwatch at the SJAA observatory site. The real eager can certainly make both events.

## OUTDOOR FEAST

If anyone left the banquet still hungry, it had to be their own fault. There was plenty of food and drinks; the list of contributors extends practically through the entire membership. Our most sincerest thanks to the many hardworkers and food providers, and the well over fifty people who showed up (includes friends of Shelly Cobban who showed up later that evening). Oh, had the clouds only left a bit earlier!! By midnight the clouds had practically vanished and so had everyone; yet the earlier evening patches did allow for viewing to a certain degree. As a result of the banquet, the club acquired a barbecue grill to be used frequently during the summer months from here on out.

=== PAGE 3 ===
# Page 3

## NORTHERN CALIFORNIA ASTRONOMY PLANNING MEETING

As reported at the banquet, many Northern California groups are pooling their efforts to coordinate activities in this region. The starting phases of this effort will be the publication of events from group to group and the telephoning of last minute activities through the center tentatively stationed at John Dobson's in San Francisco. A convention in the north similar to Riverside is being planned and will be sponsored by the Northern California groups. San Jose is pledged to assist in any way it can.

## FREMONT PEAK RESULTS (June 19)

Clear and warm. The Milky Way was blinding, and Emmet is just now recovering. The southern porch along the roadway was enough to keep one busy for the entire event. Those who couldn't be satisfied with their smaller telescopes could wander over to Dobson's 24" and burn their retnas on Jupiter. Many, many, many telescopes at Fremont Peak this year. Thanks go to Ralph and Norman who gave up Fremont Peak to drum up members at the Skyline Site.

---

SJAA is once again a member of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, and Dave is looking into membership cards for SJAA.

Other activities underway at the observatory include a seismic station being planned by Dave Ambrose (et al), and we are most concerned that his readings remain small.

Also, articles or news items for the bulletin are to be sent to Dick Glasspool, 5837 Badger Ct., Castro Valley 94546 by the second Friday (planning meeting) of each month.

HAPPY VIEWING!!