=== PAGE 1 ===
# may '76 Bulletin

**Jack Zeiders**  
**Editor**

## WHAT'S GOING ON IN THE CLUB:

**May 7: Olinder Center, 7:30 PM.**  
The general meeting this month will feature Allen Meyer, who will speak about "The Flying 36".

**May 8: Moffet Field, Ames Research center**  
**N.A.S.A. is having an open house.**

**May 18-22: Lawerence Hall of Science, Berkley.**  
The Astronomical Society of the Pacific is having their summer scientific meeting.

**May 29-31: Big Bear.**  
The Riverside Ameteur Telescope Makers Conference.

**June 4: Olinder Center, 7:30 PM.**  
This is the annual meeting where board members are nominated and elected. If you are interested in a board position, please contact the nominating commity. The members are: Gerry Rattley, Debbie Moore, Norm Wild & myself.

**June 5: Monte Sereno, Dusk, Club star party**

**June 18: Tom Mungall's home, Board meeting**

**June 25: A.A.N.C. star party at Fremont Peak.**

**July 17: Banquet & installation of officers.**

## PAST EVENTS (ancient history)

April 10 was Astronomy Day, it was also raining. Around six it started to clear. Only FOUR members made the effort to take their scopes to K-MART. Nearly one hundred people came and were shown; Saturn, Mars, the Moon and several double stars.

The April 24 star party at Coe fell victim to cold, gusty winds throughout the night.

May 1 there was to have been a star party at Skyline, however, I didn't get the bulletin out so you didn't know about it. (sorry)

April 30 to may 1 Fremont Peak was the sight of a large star party. Several clubs were represented and several hundred students as well.

=== PAGE 2 ===
# Rattley Rattles

This month I would like to present a list of the finest planetary nebulae. Messier has only four of these objects in his list, as the objects he listed were fairly large, and most planetaries are quite small. Most modern amateur telescopes are quite capable of showing these objects, and for those who look at them, the experience is a rewarding one. One tip though, for a good look use moderate to high power.

I will not go into the physics of planetaries at this time, but I will discuss it with those who ask at a star party. You can find much information on planetaries in astronomy texts and articles. All the following coordinates are for 1950, descriptions from the N.G.C., and the standard "type" for planetaries is used.(see the Skalnate Pleso catalogue. Howards Star Atlas or me.) If anyone feels that I have unjustly omitted one of their favorites, let me know and I will look into it.

| NGC | RA & DEC | MAG | SIZE | TYPE | DESCRIPTION |
|-----|----------|-----|------|------|-------------|
| 1535 | 0412-13 | 9 | 20*17 | (IV+VI) | very bright,small, round, |

very well defined edges, very suddenly brighter in the middle, mottled * mag 12

| 650-1 | 0139+51 | 12 | 157*87 | (V) | M76 "little dumbell", |
|-------|----------|-----|---------|------|------------------------|
|       |          |     |         |      | very bright, double nebula |
|       |          |     |         |      | (mag *17) |

| 1952 | 0532+22 | 8.5 | 360*240 | (VI) | M1 "Crab Nebula" very bright, |
|------|----------|-----|---------|------|-------------------------------|

very large, elongated at 135°, a little brighter in the middle, mottled. (mag *16)

| 2392 | 0726+21 | 8 | 47*43 | (IIIb+IV) | "clownface" or "strawberry" |
|------|----------|---|-------|-----------|------------------------------|

bright, small, round, central* 9mag, *8mag north following 100" (mag *11)

| 2438 | 0740-15 | 11 | 68*68 | (IV) | in M46 pretty bright, |
|------|----------|-----|-------|------|------------------------|

pretty small, very little elongated, mottled. (mag *11 )

| 3132 | 1005-40 | 8 | 84*53 | (IV) | very bright, very large, |
|------|----------|---|-------|------|--------------------------|

a little elongated, *9 in the middle ## diameter (mag *11)

| 3242 | 1022-18 | 9 | 40*35 | (IIIb+IV) | very bright, a little |
|------|----------|---|-------|-----------|------------------------|

elongated at 147°, 45" diameter, blue (mag *11)

| 3587 | 1112+55 | 12 | 203*199 | (IIIa) | M97 "Owl" very bright, |
|------|----------|-----|---------|---------|-------------------------|

very large, round, very very gradual fading out towards the edges, very suddenly brighter in the middle, 150" diameter (mag *14)

| 4961 | 1222-18 | 11 | 81*81 | (IIIa) | very bright, large, round, |
|------|----------|-----|-------|---------|----------------------------|

very suddenly much brighter in the middle to a nucleus, mottled (mag *13)

| 6210 | 1643+24 | 10 | 20*13 | (II+IV) | very bright, very small, |
|------|----------|-----|-------|----------|---------------------------|

round, disc & nuc. (mag *13)

| 6543 | 1759+67 | 9 | 22*22 | (IIIa) | "Draco" very bright, pretty |
|------|----------|---|-------|---------|------------------------------|

small, suddenly brighter in the middle to a very stellar nucleus. (mag *11)

| 6572 | 1810+07 | 9.5 | 16*13 | (IIa) | very bright, very small, |
|------|----------|-----|-------|--------|---------------------------|

round, a little hazy. (mag *12)

| 6720 | 1852+33 | 9 | 83*59 | (IV) | M57 "Ring" annular, bright, |
|------|----------|---|-------|------|------------------------------|

pretty large, considerably elongated(mag *15)

=== PAGE 3 ===
# Saaa 3

## RATTLEY RATTLES ON...........

6281    1941+06    10    106+106  (IIIa)    "Bubble" faint, large, round,
very suddenly brighter in the middle, disclike, small* north following
                                                                (mag *15)
6818    1941-14    10    22*15    (IV)    bright, very small, round.
(mag *15) (near NGC 6822 in Sgr.)
6826    1943*50    9    27*24    (IIIa)  "Blinking" bright, pretty
large, round, *11 mag in middle (mag *11)
6853    1957+23    7.5  480+240  (IIIa)  M27"Dumbbel1" very bright,
very large, binuclear, irregularly elongated (mag *13)
7009    2101-12    8    44*26    (IV+IIIa) 44*26  "Saturn" very bright, small,elliptical
(ansa on major axis) (mag *13)
7293    2227-21    6.5  900*720  (IV)  "Helical" pretty faint, very
large, elongated or binuclear (mag *13) ( easily visable in 7*50 binoculars)
7662    2324+42    9    32*28   (IV+IIIa) annular, very bright, pretty
small, round, blue. (mag *13)