=== PAGE 1 ===
# Predictions

## SEPTEMBER IN THE YEAR 1978

- **Aug. 25-26** AANC-sponsored star party at Fremont Peak.

- **Aug. 26** Indoor star party, Los Gatos Red Cross, 7:00 pm.

- **Sept. 2** Club star party at Fremont Peak.

- **Sept. 8** General Meeting with the San Mateo County Astronomical Society at Canada College. Dr. William Gilbreath of NASA-Ames will speak on Space Settlements, Satellite Solar Power Stations, and energy alternatives. See blurb section for more details.

- **Sept. 9** General Meeting, Rosicrucian Planetarium, 7:30 pm. Park & Naglee, San Jose. Gerry Rattley will give his chart talk on numbers 2,6, and 12. For the slide show, bring no more than 24 slides per person.

- **Sept. 15** Board of Directors Meeting, 8:00 pm. Jim Van Nuland's house, 3509 Calico Ave, San Jose.

- **Sept. 16** AANC Board of Directors Meeting, 5:00 pm. Los Gatos Red Cross building. Indoor star party, 7:00 pm. Graze planning meeting.

- **Sept. 23-24** Lunar Graze Occultation expedition to observe a double star graze. See the Occulting Zone page.

- **Sept. 23** Indoor star party, Los Gatos Red Cross, 7:00 pm.

- **Sept. 29-30** AANC-sponsored star party at Fremont Peak.

- **Sept. 30** Close-in club star party at Sanborn Canyon.

- **Oct. 7** General Meeting, Rosicrucian Planetarium, 7:30 pm. Park & Naglee, San Jose. Program to be announced.

- **Oct. 13** Board of Directors Meeting, 8:00 pm. Phil Hermsmeyer's house, 20900 Alves Dr, Cupertino.

- **Oct. 14** Indoor star party, Los Gatos Red Cross, 7:00 pm.

- **Oct. 21** Indoor star party, Los Gatos Red Cross, 7:00 pm.

- **Oct. 27-28** AANC-sponsored star party at Fremont Peak.

- **Oct. 28** Close-in club star party at Sanborn Canyon.

---

"I look good in a grass skirt."
Wolfgang Hanisch

---

Gerry Rattley, President 732-0202    Penny Pinschmidt, Editor 356-4330

---

*The San Jose Astronomical Association*

=== PAGE 2 ===
# Conference at Cal Poly

The following are my notes from the notes Debrah Moore took for me at the conference.

About 240-250 people attended. There were quite a few good talks, ranging in subject matter from the beautiful southern skies to astrology. Ashley McDermott, the banquet speaker, gave a talk on the limits of knowledge in astronomy. Debbie, in trying to describe it, came up with a good quote. "How many conclusions we can draw without drawing too many." And, of course, a lot was said about the upcoming solar eclipse in February.

The winner of the G. Bruce Blair Award was Jackson Carle.

At the star party, seeing was so bad Debbie had trouble finding M4. Eventually, they got clouded out.

The meals were great, the ping pong tournament was a lot of fun, as was the swimming; no one did any skinny dipping that Debbie knows of.

At the Aug. 11 Board of Director's meeting not a whole lot was discussed (that's publishable). They did discuss publicizing the club and the possibility of having a number in the phone book, and maybe even making up business cards. (Ed Schell has made a standing offer for the last 4 months to handle the printing.) We called John Rhodes at the hospital and most took turns talking to him. And the calendar was reviewed.

---

## ADS

### FOR SALE

8" Newtonian f/7 includes: cartop rack, 4 eyepieces & finder. $150.00. Also for sale is a spare tire rear door mount for a van. $7.50

Brad Carlson - 268-1580

### WANTED

Used 5-6" Casseggranian/Maksutov telescope such as a Celestron 5 or Dynamax 6, not necessarily clock driven. Please call or write about details of size, mount, price, etc.

L. K. Lantz, 1468 W 37th, San Pedro, Ca. 90731 213-923-7511 8 to 4 PM

## ADS

### FOR SALE

10" Newtonian f/8 Cave Model C Deluxe $750.00 Wanted: portable pier or tripod mounting for 8" Newtonian or Ritchey-Chretian. Price negotiable

Les DeLong - Evening 263-4612

### FOR SALE

Award winning telescope. 10" f/6 with a 5¼" f/10 guide scope. Complete dual axis Phase 4 electronic controls system Ready for deep-sky photography. $1500.

Don McGlauflin, 840 N Fine, Freseno, Ca. 93727 209-251-1013

=== PAGE 3 ===
# BLURBS

As you may have noticed, this month's Bulletin is considerably larger than my usual 9-9½ pages. This month's also marks my first anniversary. I have been editor for a whole year. For this reason I wanted to do something special, hence, the many pages, more material, more information, more maps, and writing. For the future, knowing what this Bulletin has been like, what do you want different? I need feedback and ideas. Phil Hermsmeyer thought up the idea of the question of the month, Don Machholz started his Comet Comments, Cathy Pinheiro's publishing the library.... What else do you want, like, dislike? Please let me know. I'm at most of the meetings, and my phone number is on the bottom of the front page.

John Rhodes will be going back to work after Labor Day. The operation was successful, and he's doing great! Who says people with strong minds have to have weak backs........

Denni Medlock slipped one over on us. Until I read her report on the Fremont Peak star party, I didn't know about her birthday.

On July 29, Cathy Pinheiro's birthday was celebrated two days early at the Red Cross. Phil Hermsmeyer brought in an enormous cake without the candles, which he forgot. Luckily, in a drawer in the kitchen, we found a partial box of them. But what does one do with 15 candles for a 20th birthday? Pete Manly knew. 10100 in binary translates to 20 in decimal! Five candles; the 1's were lit, the 0's unlit! It worked beautifully. Because we half demanded that Cathy come that night, I don't think she was too surprised, but it was the thought that counted.

The San Mateo club has invited us to their Sept. 8 general meeting. If you can make it, please come. It will be held at Canada College (off Hwy. 280) on 4200 Farm Hill Blvd. in Redwood City. Go to the Multi-Purpose Room below the bookstore in Building #8 at 7:45 PM.

Again, the board wants to know who has the metal, blue and white SJAA signs.

Cathy Pinheiro, Secretary, has started the club scrapbook. Give all your newspaper clippings and magazine articles about astronomy to her.

On Sept. 16, the AANC will hold their Board of Director's meeting at 5:00 PM in the Los Gatos Red Cross building. All club members should attend. This is your chance to find out what the AANC does. Afterwards, the board will attend the indoor star party, most of them never having been to one.

Many of the club members have and keep tropical fish. I have three tanks, Gerry Rattley has seven, Gary Rice, one, Dave Ambrose, one..... Fish and astronomy seem to hold the interest of the same people. How about changing the name of the club to SJAA – San Jose Aquarium and Astronomical Association!?

●

=== PAGE 4 ===
# ISAAC

# occulting zone

## GRAZE INFORMATION

**Date:** September 23-24, 1978, Saturday-Sunday. All times are PDT.

**Circumstances:** Double Start!! mags. 6.2 each, 0.64" at 138 degrees. Components will OUT and IN separately, seconds apart, which will be quite a spectacle. However, the moon is only 15 deg. up, not too favorable. Poor seeing or haze will cause trouble. Take a chance. Call me if you're brave, if I havn't signed you up already.

**Location:** Central valley west of Fresno, 150 miles. Down Hy. 101 to 152; then east across Pacheco Pass to I-5. Go south 23 miles, exit onto JT = Shields Ave. This jogs around and becomes Hy. 130 = Shles Bridge Rd. Continue to the town of Kerman. East 3 miles to the stop sign on Bishop Ave. Turn right a few blocks.

Late arrivals may wait at "Tom's Burger Hut" in the parking area, north of Kerman on Hy. 180 and Raidera Rd., southwest corner. Comvy will leave at 11:00 PM.

**Weather update:** I will call my wife before 7:00 PM. Call her after 7 to learn of weather prospects for the night. This is early enough to drive down.

**Time:** Start continuous record at 1:15 AM. Central graze time is 1:25 AM. End record at 1:35 or when star is well clear of moon.

Be ready by 12:45 AM, PDT. Allow time to search for station, and plenty for setting up, testing equipment, finding star, trying eyepieces, etc.

Come down Saturday evening, and enjoy the dark sky for some viewing. I'll be up early Sat. A.M.

**CB:** Channel 14.

The group handle is "Graze Chasers"; answer any such calls with your own handle. My handle is "Sunspot".

## Many handy numbers and neat stuff

| Item | Value |
|------|-------|
| Graze Position Angle: | 354 deg |
| Vertex angle: | 50 |
| Cusp Angle: | +38 |
| Watts Angle: | 352 |
| Moon North pole PA: | 1 deg |
| North Cusp PA: | 1 |
| South Cusp PA: | 181 |
| Sunset: | 6:56 PM |
| Civil Twilight: | 7:25 PM |
| Astro. Twilight: | 8:24 PM |
| Moonrise: | 11:48 PM |
| Star mag: | 5.7 combined |
| Spectrum: | A5 (blue-white) |
| RA (1950): | 6h11.6s |
| Declination: | 17.9 deg. |
| Moon elevation: | 15 deg |
| Azimuth: | 79 |
| Illumination: | 48%- |
| Moon RA (1978): | 6h09s |
| Declination: | +18.2 deg |
| for time: | 1 AM. |
| Constellation: | Orion |

[THIS IS FIGURE: A diagram showing the Moon with "Dark" and "Lighted Side" labeled, and arrows indicating "To Polaris", "Path", "Of Star", and "To Zenith". The azimuth is marked as 79° East]

Jim Van Nuland, (408) 371-1307
3509 Calico Ave., San Jose 95124

=== PAGE 5 ===
# A Sheep in Wolf's Clothing

Wolfgang Hanisch is 35 years old, slightly overweight, and is married to a very supportive wife, Martha. Their two children, Robert, 6, and Peter, 5, both know the planets. Wolf teaches oceanography and photography at Homestead High School and is in the middle of building his own darkroom and studio facilities.

How did he get interested in astronomy? When his oceanography class asked, "Where does all the water come from?", that led to the sun, the planets, the galaxies.... Soon he was teaching a 2-3 week course in astronomy. He did all his own research and found himself very much interested. Three years ago he contacted some SJAA members, got discouraged at the high prices of telescopes, and spent the next year learning the sky with a pair of binoculars on camping trips with his wife.

Something else kindled his interest about astronomy. A movie, The Violent Universe, described a Japanese comet seeker named Seki. Here was an ordinary person, living an ordinary life, having a family, a job, etc., but at night, on top of his house with a telescope and heated slippers, he was doing serious astronomy. It's the idea that anyone, anywhere can be an astronomer to any degree of involvement one wishes.

I asked Wolf what aspects of astronomy he liked the most, and he seemed to very much enjoy answering the question. He said that astronomy is a frontier. There are always new discoveries, new questions raised, always changing and growing. It is very mysterious and romantic; star-lit nights, beautiful sights to see, the same yet different. It puts things in another perspective. Daily problems and hassles seem dwarfed when looking up at the sky, wondering at all there is to see and know. The great distances, the great masses, objects so complex, so simple... The ideas are endless. And even the people who are interested in astronomy are interesting in themselves. Wolf now has many good friends he would never have known if he hadn't become involved.

As for the future, Wolf wants to be more active in the club, do more observing, and take pictures with his Zeiders-Wedlock cold camera. He has a C-8 and would someday like to make one of his own. Maybe a 10" or 12" f/5. Right now he's too busy. He is thinking about changing his main income to photography. He's an expert on wedding, fashion portfolio, architecture and product illustration photography. Other interests are reading, fly fishing, model railroads, collecting knives, and restoring Pachinko machines!

I asked him when he's going to run for the Board of Directors. He laughed, said he wants to very much, but is kind of timid and needs to be pushed. He has ideas for the club and would enjoy putting them to use. Wolf, you've got my vote.

**Penny Pinschmidt**

=== PAGE 6 ===
# Messier Marathon

Would you like to see nearly all the Messier objects in one night? It's possible, you know. Because of the positions of the 107 Messier objects (M91 and M102 are missing), it is possible to observe over 100 of these objects from dusk to dawn. The dates when the sun will be in a favorable position (hiding as few objects as possible) are from late March through mid-April. All during this time M74 and, probably, M77 will not be visible. During the beginning of this time period M72, M73, M30, and M2 would also be difficult to see. They would rise in the morning after twilight begins. During the end of this time period M79 and M33 would not be visible, as they would set in the evening before twilight ends.

In 1979 we have a new moon on March 28, so I would suggest Friday, March 30 or Saturday, March 31 as possible dates for undertaking this project. A group of us could go up to Loma Prieta - a good, low-horizon, dark-sky observing site, ½ hour drive south of San Jose. Those wishing to participate should begin now to familiarize themselves with the Messier objects, finding as many as they can. Those wishing the all-nighter to look through other telescopes or help the observers are certainly welcome to do so. Also welcome are those who wish to see "only" 50 or so of the easier objects. More info in next month's bulletin, or call me at 356-7727.

Don Machholz

## Comet Comments

Presently, the brightest known comet in the whole observable sky is an 11-12 mag. object near the Cetus-Pisces border. It is comet 1977g, also known as Periodic Comet Ashbrook-Jackson. While it might seem faint, it may well be worth the effort to try and see it. An ephemeris follows.

**Comet tails:** Comet discoverer Edgar Everhart conducted a study on comet discoveries in 1967. Among other things, he found that since 1840 the number of comet discoveries per year, by visual methods, has remained surprisingly consistent. The rate of new comet discoveries (visual) remains at 2.7 comets/year. Additionally, he estimates that at least 61% (204 out of 337) of the comets were found by amateurs specifically looking for comets.

### Comet Ashbrook-Jackson (1977g)

| 1978 UT  | R.A.    | Dec.     | Est. Mag. |
|----------|---------|----------|-----------|
| Aug. 20  | 0h38.4m | 0°03'    | 11.9      |
| Aug. 30  | 0 35.3  | 0 50     | 11.8      |
| Sep. 9   | 0 29.6  | 1 29     | 11.8      |
| Sep. 19  | 0 21.9  | 2 02     | 11.9      |
| Sep. 29  | 0 13.3  | 2 29     | 12.0      |

(From IAU Cir. 3161) 8/20/78 Don Machholz - 356-7727

=== PAGE 7 ===
# Rattley Rattles On . . .

## Finest Skalnate Pleso Objects - Chart V, continued

**NGC** RA (1950) dec Con SP:mag,size,type,dist

**7000** 20 57.0 +44 08 Cyg gn:(10):120'x100':*aCyg:280pc

**H.V 37:** Faint,extremely Large,diffuse nebulosity: "North America Nebula"; use very low power; easiest with binoculars & dark skies; the "Pelican Nebula", I.C. 5067-70, is off the Atlantic Coast(is not a visual object).

7008 20 59.1 +54 21 Cyg pn:13(*13):1½:IIIb:4170pc

**H.I 192:** considerably Bright,Large,Elongated in P.A. 45°±,mottled,double star attached: use moderate power; like a tiny "Owl Nebula".

7027 21 05.1 +42 02 Cyg pn:10½(*17):0'3x0'2:VI:1100pc

**Planetary,stellar(= *8½ Mag.):** use moderate and high power.

7048 21 12.6 +46 04 Cyg pn:11½(*18):1'0x0'8:IIIb:1660pc

pretty Faint,pretty Large,diffuse,irregularly Round,very little brighter in the Middle: use moderate power.

7086 21 29.8 +51 22 Cyg oc:9½:8'-50*:e:2880pc

**H.VI 32:** Cluster,considerably Large,very Rich,pretty Compressed,stars from mag. 11 to 16: use low power.

7092 21 30.4 +48 13 Cyg oc:5½:30'-25*:e:250pc

**M.39:** Cluster,very Large,very Poor,very little Compressed,stars from mag. 7 to 10: use lowest power; easy binocular object.

I.S146 21 51.3 +47 02 Cyg gn:(13):12'x12':*10:1700pc

pretty Bright,very Large,irregular Figure,star of 9½ mag in the Middle: "Cacoon Nebula"; a very difficult object; use low power & a very dark sky!

7209 22 03.2 +46 15 Lac oc:7½:20'-50*:d:1320pc

**H.VII 53:** Cluster,Large,considerably Rich,pretty Compressed,stars from mag. 9 to 12: use low power; easy and fine object.

7217 22 05.6 +31 07 Peg eg:11:2'6x2'3:Sb:12Mpc

**H.II 207:** Bright,pretty Large,gradually brighter in the Middle,extremely mottled: use low and moderate power and dark skies.

7243 22 13.2 +49 38 Lac oc:7½:20'-40*:d:790pc

**H.VIII 75:** Cluster,Large,Poor,a little Compresse~,stars very Large: use low power.

7331 22 34.8 +34 10 Peg eg:9½:10'0x2'3:Sb:11½Mpc

**H.I 53:** Bright,pretty Large,pretty much Elongated in P.A. 163°,suddenly much brighter in the Middle: use low and moderate powers for a view of this very rewarding galaxy; this is one that Messier should not have missed; Stephens Quintet is about a degree south and a little preceding of this galaxy.

7380 22 44.9 +57 49 Cep oc:9:10'-50*:d:790pc

**H.VIII 77:** Cluster,pretty Large,pretty Rich,a little Compressed,stars from mag. 9 to 13: use low power.

7610 23 19.7 +40 35 And eg:11½:11'0x1'4:SBb:7Mpc

**H.II 600:** considerably Faint,Large,much Elongated in P.A. 164°,very little brighter in the Middle,mottled: almost edge-on; use low power.

7662 23 23.5 +42 14 And pn:9(*12½):0'5x0'4:IV+IIIa:3550pc

**H.IV 18:** !!!,Planetary or Ring,very Bright,pretty Small,Round,blue: use moderate and high powers on this very pleasing object! easy central star!

7686 23 27.8 +48 51 And oc:8:15'-35*:d:1890pc

**H.VIII 69:** Cluster,Poor,a little Compressed,stars from mag. 7 to 11: use low power.

7789 23 54.5 +56 26 Cas oc:9½:30'-200*:e:3980pc

**H.VI 30:** Cluster,very Large,very Rich,very-much Compressed,stars from mag. 11 to 18: use low power; fine binocular object; moderate powers will reveil ciicular patterns making this cluster look like a spiral galaxy seen broad-side; located midway between ρ and σ Cassiopeiae.

Dark Skies; *[Signature]*

=== PAGE 8 ===
# RATTLEY RATTLES

This is my first official President's Message for this term of office, this being my second term of office as President of the SJAA, and I would like to say that it;s good to be back, I think!?!? I feel, as I am sure most of you do also, that John Rhodes did excellent job of leading the club in the previous year. As was stated at the July banquet at Michael's, John's record speaks for itself as the club increased in size from a previos level of around 70 members to more than 90, and we're off to a good start in membership this year.

My goals for the club this year is not necessarily going to be to increase the membership, thought that would not be unwelcome, but instead will be to support efforts to get the club more active and to get more participation in club's activities.

Prior to our regularly scheduled Red Cross Indoor Star Party on Saturday, September 16 there is going to be held the September board meeting of the Astronomical Association of Northern California (AANC). It will be held at the Red Cross building in Los Gatos at 5:00 P.M. I would like to encourage everyone to try to attend this one as it is being held here in order that those persons who would like to know more about who and what the AANC is all about can find out through first hand experience. Following this AANC board meeting will be our scheduled Red Cross Star Party.

Preparation for the September 23 grazing occultation expedition is progressing nicely. Contact Jim Van Nuland if you want to know more are plan to attend.

Just a reminder, the Solar Eclipse on February 29, 1979 is nearing fast, are you ready? I'm not, I've got lots to do!

The September club meeting at the Rosicrucian Planetarium should be a fun one for me and I hope the general membership enjoys it also. At this meeting I am going to give my first Chart Talk under the star dome of the planetarium. We are also having a general slide night at this meeting, so bring any slides that you feel will be of interest to the club; i.e. new deep sky photos, planet or Moon shots, Riverside Telescope Makers Conference, astronomical vacations, or any thing else with an astronomical theme. There will be a limit of a couple of dozen slides per member.

Update to two objects included in my article on the best objects on the Skalnate Pleso Atlas of the Heavens, chart I:

- NGC 40 -- The central star is easily visable in an 8-inch scope, has anyone seen it with anything smaller? Try it at the next star party!
- NGC 7142 -- This one is very faint and difficult, only viewable from very dark skies!

Astronomically Yours;

*[Signature: David V. Rodrigues]*

=== PAGE 9 ===
# SECRETARY'S LIBRARY

## Cathy Pinheiro

Once again, here is this month's list of books, pamphlets, and magazines which are available to all club members. For further information in regards to the books themselves or how you go about obtaining them, call me at home any evening at 265-4824, or you can also get hold of me at one of the club meetings.

**Joint Convention, Western Amateur Astronomers,**
**(Aug. 24-26, 1961, Long Beach, Calif.)**

Rocket Development - Diary of the Space Age Pioneer by Robert Goddard

The First Book of Astronomy by Vivian Grey

The Language of Nature by David Hawkins

Leaflets from the Astronomical Society of the Pacific

Mercury, The Journal of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific

Physical Studies of Minor Planets edited by T. Gehrels

Astronomy, A Popular Handbook by Harold Jacoby

Lucretius on the Nature of the Universe Translated by Ronald Latham

Consider the Heavens by Forest Ray Moulton

College Mathematics by Kaj L. Nielsen

Out of the Sky, An Introduction to Meteoritics by H.H. Nininger

---

This month's question of the month is "What does the Black Hole look like?" The "answers" are as follows.

"A Black Hole is like nothing I've ever seen." Jim Van Nuland

"Once you've seen it, it's too late." Ralph Lowd

"Nothing." Gerry Rattley

"It looks like the world looks to me without my contact lenses."
Denni Medlock

"I don't know. I've never seen one." Cathy Pinheiro

" " Kevin Medlock

Next month's question of the month will be "What is the speed of gravity?"

=== PAGE 10 ===
# Report of August 12 General Meeting

Gerry Rattley got his first meeting as president underway with a few announcements. John Rhodes' back surgery, we think, was successful, and he left the hospital that day. Concerning future activities, brief mention was made of the San Mateo meeting September 8, the AANC board meeting September 16, and the lunar graze September 23-24. Pete Manly is submitting a grant proposal to IBM for a television camera for the club's use in public presentations, occultations, etc. Anyone with questions or suggestions for its application should see him.

For the program, we had the planetarium's current production on Stonehenge. It was very nice. After some background information on the people who constructed it, there was an explanation of what the various stone configurations represented. For instance, the 56 Aubrey holes are related to lunar eclipses.

Thanks to Rita Miram and Penny for cookies after the meeting.

Suzanne Lowd, Staff Reporter

---

In the past few years, new moon star parties at Freakie Peak have been more like invasions of people looking for a place to eat, drink, be merry, and crash (sometimes into telescopes). There are only a few of us long-timers who remember how the old summer, shirt-sleeved, observing-minded star parties used to be. But faith in Fremont Peak was freshly repaired at the new moon star party on August 4-5 when, on Friday night, not only was the temperature at 2 AM around the 75° mark, but Kevin and I (and Duhbe, the cat) were the only people there! Hallelujah! Clear skies, tee shirt weather, and an 18". Who could ask for more?

Of course, Saturday night saw the arrival of more people, but it was the type of gathering where everyone knew everybody else. Jack Zeiders showed up with his 10", Debbie Moore and Doug Berger observed with Debbie's refractor, Pete Archain brought along his girl friend and his Questar (spending equal time with both, of course), and Pete Manly brought himself and a great number of good stories. As always, the steadfast handful from Chabot was there, this time with birthday cake (mine) that wasdeliciously devoured at 1 AM. (Yes, there was enough for everybody. See what you missed?!) Smaller star parties are much nicer. We can only hope in the future more of them occur.

Denni Medlock

---

"I really don't remember what went on."
Jack Zeiders about the Aug. 19th Red Cross

"I do know where the Big Dipper is." Phil Hermsmeyer

"I guess I ain't too bright." Gerry Rattley

"We aren't all like Phil; we don't just barge in." Jack Zeiders

"Does anyone have a ladder - like about 3,000 feet tall?"
John Rhodes at the Aldebaran graze

"It wasn't a bad night - just a lousy morning."
Bob Fingerhut about the Aldebaran graze

=== PAGE 11 ===
# 102TH PLACES PLEASE

## C OF FREMONT NEAR SOUTH
AT PARK GILROY

ROTARY
TRAIL
BASIL ON TRAIL
SOUTH OR NEWHALL TOLL
(=NEWHALL)
TO NEWHALL
FOLLOW PLACER CANYON
GO TO THE END OF IT
I'M SURE
IN MURIETA BOW THE
TOWN VALLEY ON THE
RIDGE
WAIT TO THE TRAIL TO THE
LEFT TO THE BUILDING AS
GET TO THE TOP
THERE YOU MAY LOCATE ON THE GATE
WILL
THEN LEON ON THE LEFT (PLEASE)
PLEASE CLOSE THE GATE IT BEHIND
AND BEST IT BEHIND

FROM SAN JOSE IS TO GILROY
AT THE
HAVE
EXIT HUMAN (ICO)
TAKE

AT THE FREEWAY VEHICLE WINDOWS
LIGHT TURN TURN LEFT UP
NO DUMP
FOLLOW THE SIGNS
YOU HAVE TO ELECTRIC TO
PLEASE AFTER YOU TURN,
GO TO THE END OF THAT ROAD
ABOUT IN MILES SWITCHEL
TICKLEATER CAMP FOR TW
START IN THE RUTS AT THE MOTOR
HISTORYCORDAIRY

---

## MAP

[This section contains a hand-drawn map showing various trails and locations including:
- North arrow (Z)
- IOI
- Anderson Lake
- Coyote Lake
- Bike X
- Gill Road
- Dam Brt
- National Water District
- Bike X
- Hollister
- Fremont Peak State Park
- Synths
- IOI
- Gilro
- Various trails and paths marked with arrows and labels]

=== PAGE 12 ===
# GERRY RAFFERTY DRAWN THIS MAP
## IF YOU CAN'T UNDERSTAND DIRECTIONS TO GERRY'S GRAND DIRECTIONS WILL TRY TO HELP YOU.

TO THE LOS GATOS RED CROSS BUILDING AT LOS GATOS SOUTH BLDG. OFF HWY 17 THRU TWO TRAFFIC LIGHTS THRUWAY #9 TO SARATOGA THEN PAST MT. TRAFFIC LIGHTS THEN PAST ALL THE GAS STATIONS

AS YOU START OUT OF TOWN YOU WILL CLIMB A SMALL #17 THE RED CROSS IS ABOUT RIGHT ON THE HILL ON THE WAY UP ON THE HILL

**TO SANBORN SKYLINE C.O. PARK**
STATION AS YOU LEAVE BUTTONS C.O. F-D SARATOGA - MIN LEFT SANBORN SKYLINE C.O. THE TRAFFIC LIGHT JUST LEFT IN YOU ONLY CAMPING LIGHT AT THE TRAFFIC LIGHT C/4 BIG DULUTH-AGE ON SANBORN HIGHWAY # ALSO UP THE HILL HERE

**GO ABOUT 2 MILES UP THAT ROAD AND TURN LEFT ON RD. AS YOU TURN SANBURN RD. THAT PRIVATE UNDERGROUND**

**JUST OVER ONE MILE UP SANBURN MILE UP SANBORN WATCH FOR THE PARK**

WE WAS THE OVERNIGHT PANJUM LOW BE CAREFUL

**WITH THE SIGNS**

[THIS IS FIGURE/CHART: A hand-drawn map showing various roads and directions including "HIGHWAY 17", "LOS GATOS", "RED CROSS", "UNIVERSITY AVE", "SARATOGA", "SANBORN", "SKYLINE RD", "ROSE AVE", "TRAFFIC LIGHT", and other street names. The map includes a hexagonal shape in the center representing what appears to be a campground or park area with some structures drawn inside it.]

=== PAGE 13 ===
# SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION, INC. - SEPTEMBER 1978

| Name | Address | City | ZIP | Phone |
|------|---------|------|-----|-------|
| ALES, MARK ALAN | 1120 Ranchero Wy #19 | San Jose | 95117 | 248-0540 |
| AMBROSE, DAVE | 17720 Walnut St | El Cerrito | 94530 | 233-5468 |
| ARREALO, PETER | 2151-582 Oakland Rd | San Jose | 95131 | 946-0421 |
| BAHL,CHARLES | 2966 Moorpark Av.#52 | San Jose | 95128 | 248-1220 |
| BARRETT, RICHARD | 1520 Santa Maria | San Jose | 95125 | 264-4320 |
| BELLEVILLE, LOGAN M | 18550 Sobey Rd | Saratoga | 95070 | 379-4989 |
| BENASSAI, BRUNO | 475 Cumulus #35 | Sunnyvale | 94087 | 733-9154 |
| BLOECH, WAYNE | 1476 Alpine St | Santa Clara | 95051 | 241-5532 |
| BOWES, JOHN D | 1056 Miller Ave | San Jose | 95129 | |
| BRIDGE, RALPH | 10395 Judy Ave | Cupertino | 95014 | 252-9396 |
| BRYNER, J.W. | 420 Wickert Rd | Boulder Creek | 95006 | 338-3117 |
| BUETTNER, DOUGLAS H | 6659 Mt. Fackon Dr | San Jose | 95120 | 997-1783 |
| CALDWELL, ROBERT B | 1590 Peacock Ave | Sunnyvale | 94087 | 245-3762 |
| CARLSON, BRAD | 6874 Trinidad Dr | San Jose | 95120 | 268-5825 |
| CHERNE, EARL R | 1794 Whitwood Ln #3 | Campbell | 95008 | 374-9570 |
| CINCOTTA, JOHN | 1720 Halford #332 | Santa Clara | 95051 | |
| CISNEROS, EUGENE L | 1584D E Alta Vista Wy | San Jose | 95127 | 923-6800 |
| COOK, GEORGE R | 905 Seena Ave | Los Altos | 94022 | 961-1577 |
| COTTON, RON | 1135 Dover Ave | San Jose | 95120 | |
| CULP, JEFF | 13638 Riverside Ct | Saratoga | 95070 | 867-9844 |
| CUNHA, RON | 4412 Amador Rd | Fremont | 94538 | 797-2823 |
| D'AMICO, AMY | 1605 Tierra Buena | San Jose | 95121 | |
| DAY, BRIAN | 1475 Koch Ln | San Jose | 95125 | 266-8690 |
| DEGRAFF,BRUCE & MARIA | 7130 Point Dunes Ct | San Jose | 95139 | 224-0972 |
| DELANEY, JOHN | 2410 Woodland Ave | San Jose | 95128 | 296-8559 |
| DELONG, LES | 2951 Postwood Dr | San Jose | 95132 | 263-4612 |
| DIBBELL, FRANK M | 710 Georgia St | Sunnyvale | 94086 | 733-7208 |
| EARHART, J PATRICK | 251 Howes Ct | Los Gatos | 95030 | 371-7131 |
| EDWARDS, TOM | 1182 Crandano Ct | Sunnyvale | 94087 | 736-5550 |
| FINGERHUT, BOB | 340 Rio Verde Pl #4 | Milpitas | 95035 | 263-4455 |
| FOJO, MANUEL | 258 Thompson Ave | Mountain View | 94040 | 967-0228 |
| GIMPLE, H WILLIAM | 1486 Medallion Dr | San Jose | 95120 | 268-7967 |
| GLASSPQOL, RICHARD | 629 Catamaran #2 | Foster City | 94404 | 349-2144 |
| GLEASON, JOHN | 2655 Keystone Av #20 | Santa Clara | 95051 | 241-1058 |
| GREGORY, DR A B | 5480 Fairway Dr | San Jose | 95127 | 258-6095 |
| GUSTAFSON, MIKE | 1515 Jarvis Ct | San Jose | 95113 | 266-3250 |
| HALLEY, SARA | 926 Foothill Dr | San Jose | 95123 | 227-0767 |
| HANISCH, WOLFGANG | 1815 Cleveland Ave | San Jose | 95126 | 998-0861 |
| HANSEN, RONALD L | 10941 Miquelita Rd | San Jose | 95127 | 258-0449 |
| HERMSMEYER, PHIL | 20900 Alves Dr | Cupertino | 95014 | 252-5529 |
| HERSCHKORN, JOHN | 1255 Echo Valley Dr | San Jose | 95120 | 997-0434 |
| HOLLABAUGH, ROY | 5328 Cedar Grove Cir | San Jose | 95123 | 226-1795 |
| INGEBRETSEN, CHARLES | 865 South 8th St | San Jose | 95112 | 294-3227 |
| JOHNSON, JAMES W | 17010 Holiday Dr | Morgan Hill | 95037 | 779-9036 |
| JONES, CLIFFORD D | 1507 Lyle Dr | San Jose | 95129 | 743-2398 |
| KOLLER, DAVID V | 7776 Hazelnut Pl | Newark | 94560 | 797-8865 |
| LO, JEFFREY | 4090 Cranford Circle | San Jose | 95124 | 377-3139 |
| LOOS, JIM | 13680 Rossmerc Ct | Saratoga | 95070 | 867-1264 |
| LOWD, RALPH & SUZANNE | 3387 Kenneth Dr | Palo Alto | 94303 | 494-6034 |
| MACHHOLZ, DON | 34-B Filimer Ave | Los Gatos | 95030 | 356-7727 |
| MARTIN, RONNIE | 1310 Perralta Ct | San Jose | 95120 | 268-0544 |
| MCPEAK, WILLIAM L | 4563 Grimsby Dr | San Jose | 95130 | 379-2071 |
| MEDLOCK, KEVIN&DENNI | 16105 Via Parc | San Lorenzo | 94580 | 278-8475 |
| MEYER, ALLAN | 200 E Dana B-34 | Mountain View | 94041 | 969-0716 |
| MEYER, JACK K | 1415 Lost Acre Dr | Felton | 95018 | 335-7318 |

=== PAGE 14 ===
```markdown
| MIRAM, RITA | 7764 Hazelnut Pl | Newark | 94560 | 797-9916 |
| MOORE, DEBBIE | 5336 Harwood Rd | San Jose | 95124 | 269-7466 |
| MORGAN, EDMUND C | 1964 Kirby Wy | San Jose | 95124 | 377-4393 |
| MUNGALL, THOMAS | 1141 Hollyhead Ln | San Jose | 95129 | 257-3262 |
| NAPIARATE, ANTONIO | 343 Park Hill Dr | Milpitas | 95035 | 263-5415 |
| NEINCHEL, NORMAN | 190 Rose Ct | Campbell | 95008 | 378-4488 |
| OLLINS, RICHARD | 2479 Amaryl Dr | San Jose | 95132 | 259-0270 |
| PERRY, CARLTON J | 273 N King Rd | San Jose | 95116 | 291-9122 |
| PINHEIRO, CATHY | 1787 Lancaster Dr#14 | San Jose | 95124 | 265-4824 |
| PINSCHMIDT, PENNY | 16385 Peacock Ln | Los Gatos | 95030 | 356-4330 |
| RATTLEY, GERALD W | 185 Homestead Rd #2 | Sunnyvale | 94087 | 732-0202 |
| RHODES, JOHN D | 1205 Payne Ct | Los Altos | 94022 | 969-2615 |
| RICE, GARY & JACKIE | 1833 Redwood Ave | Redwood City | 94061 | 366-6705 |
| RODGERS, RICHARD | 1020 Golf Ct | Mountain View | 94040 | 961-5458 |
| SCHAUPF, RICHARD W | 22295 Carta Blanca Dr | Cupertino | 95014 | 732-3559 |
| SCHELL, ED | P O Box 1345 | Los Gatos | 95030 | 356-7498 |
| SCHMIDT, ARTHUR W | 26200 Loma Prieta Wy | Los Gatos | 95030 | 353-2853 |
| TAMBLYN, BILL | 1176 Dresden Wy | San Jose | 95129 | 253-2278 |
| THERKELSEN, DR ROBERT | 2941 Pleasure Pt Dr | Santa Cruz | 95062 | 475-3673 |
| VAN NULAND, JAMES | 3509 Calico Ave | San Jose | 95124 | 371-1307 |
| VERMILION, JAMES R | 10171 Richwood Dr | Cupertino | 95014 | 255-7367 |
| WAKEMAN, DONALD E | 1486 Blackhawk Ct | Sunnyvale | 94087 | 245-6366 |
| WEBSTER, LARRY | 5291 Elrose Ave | San Jose | 95124 | 267-4133 |
| WELCH, SHERI | 1044 Fleetwood Dr | San Jose | 95120 | 268-5502 |
| WEST, LLOYD E | 5021 Cribari Vale | San Jose | 95135 | 274-4382 |
| WILD, NORMAN D | 7557 Orange BlossomDr | San Jose | 95129 | 252-8966 |
| YATABE, MARK GEOFFREY | 16320 Burton Rd | Los Gatos | 95030 | 356-5229 |
| ZEIDERS, JACK M | 725 Minnesota Ave | San Jose | 95125 | 292-0107 |

## BULLETIN SUBSCRIBERS

| CHERRINGTON, WM J | 367 21st Ave | San Francisco | 94121 | 752-9420 |
| DIEHL, MARSHALL W | 1516 Quail Ave | Sunnyvale | 94087 | 248-9825 |
| MANLY, PETER L | 621 Cornelia Ct | Mountain View | 94040 | 965-8357 |
| MCGLAUPLIN, MICHAEL D | 840 N Fine | Fresno | 93727 | 251-1013 |
| PETERSEN, JACK | 1840 Yosemite Dr | Milpitas | 95035 | 262-1457 |
```

=== PAGE 15 ===
I was not at the Henry Coe star party on August 5. From what I heard, I missed a very crowded, warm night. There were a lot of telescopes and a lot of people on that mountain top. Les DeLong, not finding space above, set up in the camping area. He spent a happy night logging Messier objects after Messier object, taking time out only to sic all the drunks up the hill!

The Wednesday before, August 2, Debbie Moore, Rita Miram, and I loaded three telescopes into Debbie's trunk and took off for Coe. For the first time I had a telescope all to myself and spent until 1:00 AM discovering the heavens. Now I just gotta get my 6" going! Anyway, the weather was downright hot. Because my mind couldn't quite comprehend warm star parties yet, I did wear a sweater, even if I didn't really need it. To me, that night was one of the best star parties I've ever been to and more than made up for missing the official club event on Saturday.

**Penny Pinschmidt**

## EDITORIAL

There are quite a few members in this club who are known to be very opinionated. Despite that, only one, Ed Schell (of course), has ever written a guest editorial. Not to mention any names, but, people like Jack Zeiders never hesitate to tell me face to face what they thought of something I wrote. If, by chance, I mention the idea of repeating what they said to me in the form of a guest editorial to be published in the Bulletin, they said no!

What is everybody afraid of? I write editorials nearly every month, and I'm still alive. Is this club just full of a lot of hot air, or will somebody actually DO something?

*Penny E. Pinschmidt*

---

[Comic strip with three panels showing two stick figures in conversation:

Panel 1: 
"I WAS JUST SITTING HERE STUDYING THE SUN." [shows sun symbol]
"HEY! THERE'S THE MOON!" [shows moon/crescent symbol]

Panel 2:
"WHAT'S IT DOING OUT IN THE DAYTIME ? ? ?"
[shows moon/crescent symbol]

Panel 3:
"BOY, THIS WORLD IS GETTING MORE FOULED-UP EVERY DAY!"
]