=== PAGE 1 ===
# the san jose astronomical association

**SIAAI**

John P. Gleason  
Editor

# august '11

## CALENDAR OF EVENTS

**Aug. 5:** Olinder Center, 7:30 P.M.

Comet Hunting will be the subject of this evening meeting. Association member Don Machholz, an avid comet hunter, who has logged hundreds of hours searching the skys for comets, will present this most interesting program. Dave Nakaji will give his Black Hole talk at the October General Meeting.

**Aug. 12:** Board Meeting, 8:00 P.M. John Rhodes home

**Aug. 13:** El Sereno, Dusk till Dawn F.E.A.O.

The successful field expeditions to the El Sereno observing site last summer has prompted the association to hold another observing session here during the new moon week. The site has an excellent southern horizon and unusually dark skys for being so close to the city. Remember how to get there? See the map on the next page.

**Aug. 19,20:** Fremont Peak State Park, AANC WEEKEND STAR PARTY

Ah.......those summer nights at Freeky Peak. Summer star parties are usually well attended by the bay area organizations. If you have not been to Fremont Peak and are interested in seeing a wide range of telescopes and their keepers you are invited to attend. The very dark skys at the peak afford us views of deep sky objects as you have never seen them before.

**Aug. 20,27:** Los Gatos Red Cross, 7:00 P.M.

**Sept. 2:** Olinder Center, 7:30 P.M.  
Dr. E.R. Therkelson will present, "What To Do With The Stars".

**Sept. 10:** Henry Coe Park, Dusk till Dawn F.E.A.O.

**Sept. 17,18:** AANC/NASA JOINT CONFERENCE ON ASTRONOMY

Pre-registration by Wednesday, September 7, will be **MANDATORY**. There will be no provisions for post registration. Please send registration and check to: AANC REGISTRATION, c/o Dennis Frerichs, 6154 Overdale Ave., Oakland, CA. 94605

## NEW OFFICERS ELECTED

At the June 10 board meeting of the San Jose Astronomical Association the Board of Directors elected the Association Officers for the next year. They are:

PRESIDENT: JOHN D. RHODES  
TREASURER: ROBERT FINGERHUT

VICE PRESIDENT: GERALD W. RATTLEY  
Secretary: CATHY PINHEIRO

## BULLETIN EDITOR RESIGNS

Yes, here's your chance to become the bulletin editor for the SJAA. Your present editor is resigning his position as of the September issue. It has been a lot of fun and I would like to extend my deepest appreciation to those members who helped me with and contributed to our bulletin. Sincerely, [signature]

=== PAGE 2 ===
# DOGS

## Save these Maps for future confusion
**GUARANTEED TO BE ACCURATE ± ∞ percent**

### approximate Directions to Los Gatos Red Cross

---

**Top Map Section:**
- SARATOGA + WEST IN HOTEL = SFRENO + Shell...
- Monte Vista Rd.
- Phone sign
- TRICK MOUNTAIN
- Phone sign
- Del Monte
- 65th Moon 17
- Kalo's about 85th Moon 17
- San Jose
- SAN JOSE 1-mile + San Jose
- Jack Lori's Dale
- S.LOAA

**Bottom Map Section:**
- West
- Saratoga Av.
- Highway 9
- Death Motel 1-10-96
- (1) Hwy 9 west Saratoga Turn off
- Various business signs including:
  - McDonalds
  - Bank
  - Arby's
  - Lightning
  - Lincoln
  - Burger
  - Shell
- "Uphill" direction marker
- "Cross Here To reach Red Cross By Yellow Vacation Time Etc."

**MAP: J. ZASTERA**

=== PAGE 3 ===
# news notz

## [SDAA Logo]

> Ideologies are essentially matters for indoor theorizing, but freedom and independence walk the fields and stand on the hilltops.
> 
> Hal Borland

The Uhuru X-ray astronomy satellite has found evidence of gas between galaxies in a cluster with a total mass 5-6 times that of the visible matter.

Science News, July 16

Perihelion for comet Halley has been predicted for 1600 est on Feb. 9, 1986.

Science News, July 16

The blackbody background radiation has been found to not be the same in all directions. The Milky Way Galaxy has a net motion with respect to the background of 607 km/sec towards 11hrs R.A. +6 degress Dec.

Science News, July 16

Halton Arp of Hale Observatories has found a bright object with a redshift corresponding to a speed of 13,300 km/sec in front of the galaxy NGC 1199 which has a redshift corresponding to 2,600 km/sec.

Science News, July 2

The Jet Propulsion Laboratory reports from observed spectra that the surface of Io is 55% sulfur, 30% biodite (a special form of "salt") and 15% iron.

Science News, May 28

Comet Encke was observed visually at Lowell Observatory on July 14 at about mag. 13.

IAU Circular 3091

Prepared by Ed Schell

## A D S I N F I N I T U M

FOR SALE--Maksutov, 4.35", f/25.3 in 17" tube. 10x40 finder, several 1¼" eyepieces, barlow, roof prism. 12 volt drive, fork mount (like Questar), carrying case, Linhof tripod plus table mount. Contact Fred LeRocker, 269-9380. Price is open.

FOR SALE--12" f/8 with 6" f/8 Newtonians. English mount. 1¼" focusers, no eyepieces. Digital display of current and new positions, auto slew to new position. Resolution: 1min RA, 0.2 deg, Dec. Electronics need refining. Automatic and Manual slew and guiding from control Paddle. Best offer over $500. Contact Larry Webster, 267-4133. Or Jim Van Nuland, 371-1307

FOR SALE--Celestron 5" f/6 telescope/telephoto, 1¼" visual back, diagonal, 2 25mm eyepiece, Celestron X,Y tangent assembly to use the 5" as a guide telescope on larger instrument, factory orange paint, carrying case, Excellent condition. $450 Contact John Gleason 241-1058

FOUND---Rechargeable flashlight, Sanyo brand, at the Ed Levin Park picnic. Contact Ed Schell or John Rhodes.