=== PAGE 1 ===
# SJAA EPHEMERIS

**VOLUME 3 NUMBER 5 OFFICIAL PUBLICATION OF THE SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION MAY, 1992**

## Directions to Houge Park Site of SJAA Public Star Party
[sounds like *Hogie*]

From Highway 17: Take Camden Ave. traveling east to Bascom Ave. Turn right. Continue to next stop light which will be Woodard Ave. Turn left on Woodard and continue to the first stop sign which will be Twilight. Take a right on Twilight for three blocks to Sunset and Houge Park. There is Parking available. Telescope w/vehicles only will be permitted onto the basketball court. Park lights will be turned off.

From Blossom Hill: Take Union Ave heading north. Turn left onto Woodard Ave. at the stop light. At the third stop sign turn left onto Twilight for three blocks to Sunset and Houge Park.

From Hillsdale: Continue until it becomes Camden Ave. heading west. At Union turn left to Woodard Ave. (the first stop light). Turn right onto Woodard. At the third stop sign turn left onto Twilight. Continue three blocks to Sunset and Houge Park.

*PLEASE NOTE: the above are the correct directions to Houge Park.* I appologise for not knowing my right from my left, but maybe it is because I have three mirrors in my optical system [mind]. The map is correct however! . . . ed

*Also* my apologies to Syd Goldstein. Syd has a want ad for his C-8. I inadvertently transposed digits in his telephone number. Check out his ad, because it looks like a good deal. . . ed

*Only* 12 people heard Shilo Unruh speak at our general meeting. Too bad! Come and listen to John Gleason talk about astrophotography. John, we think, is the best around at this part of astronomy. . . . ed

---

**May 2:** SJAA's Auction at Houge Park. 2:00 p.m. til done.

**May 2:** Star Party at Grant Ranch w/Hails Valley Group.

**May 8:** Star Party at Houge Park on Twilight Ave. just off Woodard.

**May 9:** Astronomy Day. Bring Solar Scopes to Houge or Milpitas Library

**May 9:** 8:00 p.m. General meeting at Milpitas Library. Board of Directors meet at 6:30 p.m. preceeding the program. Speaker: John Gleason - Astrophotography.

**May 16:** Beginning Astronomy Class - Milpitas Library.

**May 22 - 25:** Riverside Telescope Maker's Conference at Big Bear.

**May 30:** Star Party split between Grant Ranch w/ Hails Valley and Fremont Peak.

**June 5:** Star Party at Houge Park.

**June 6:** Rest - No activity. Maybe go to The Peak?

**June 13:** 8:00 p.m. General meeting at Milpitas Library. Board of Directors meet at 6:30 p.m. preceeding the program. Speaker: Dr. Roger Romani, Dept. Physics, Stanford - Neutron Stars, Black Holes, Cosmology.

**June 14:** Partial eclipse of the moon

**June 20:** 8:00 p.m. Beginning Astronomy Class - Milpitas Library.

**June 27:** Star Party at Grant Ranch w/Hails Valley Group.

**June 30:** Total eclipse of the sun - $2700 to the south Atlantic will get you a view. Maybe there will be less expensive photographs in *Sky and Telescope*.

---

## Star Parties by ed

This month's star parties at Fremont Peak and Grant Ranch had a large amount of *FOG.* In addition to the fog the temperature was quite chilly. At both places the wind was also a factor. At Fremont Peak, I believe the wind was what drove the fog up over the peak. It was so thick the red light on the TV tower would flicker in and out. Later in the evening the fog created a considerable amount of dew.

Bob Elsberry did get Jupiter in his eyepiece once or twice. His little home made telescope is a short focus 5-1/2" mirror. I had thought his mirror would make a nice Lenless Wright camera (see ATM Book 2), but Bob was happy with what he had done. To be truthful though, there is some fuzziness with it. I suggested to Bob before we left for the Peak that he cut a mask to stop his scope down, from about an f3.8 to a f5 or 6. To make a Lenless Wright the mask must be placed at the focal point - a very convenint location on his scope. It really seemed to work as described. The image sharpened considerably. However, more expirementation and use is needed to be sure.

Grant Ranch had 15 telescopes set up by dark, however *FOG* again played havoc along with wind and temperature! I'll tell you, to me it was bitter cold in the wind and we weren't in the fog as we were at the Peak. It was interesting to return into the valley as there was no fog cover. Jim Van Nuland measured the temperature at 48° F around sundown. Jim had a nice 2 day old moon in his Scope. We missed seeing Paul Barton. Jim Van Nuland and Bob Brauer stuck around untill about 2:00 am and spotted Comet Tanaka-Machholtz. Jim said, "You could actually see it move!"

---

**Officers • Pres. Jack Zelders • Vice Pres. Paul Mancuso • Tres. Jack Peterson • Sec. Jim Van Nuland • Editors Bob Madden and Paul Barton**

=== PAGE 2 ===
# COMET COMMENTS
by Don Machholtz

One new comet has been discovered recently, it should be visible for the next few weeks. Comet Shoemaker-Levy (1991d) has faded in the morning sky, but another comet by the same name- Comet Shoemaker-Levy (1991a) brightens in our morning sky. Meanwhile, comet Mueller apparently did not survive perihelion.

## Periodic Comet Howell (1992c):

S. Larson and J. Scotti recovered this comet from Kitt Peak on Mar. 5 at magnitude 21. It should brighten to magnitude 15 by early next year.

## Comet Tanaka-Machholz (1992d):

This comet was photographed by Z. Tanaka of Japan on March 24 as a tenth magnitude object moving at an apparent speed of >4 degrees/day. Due in part to poor weather, the Toyko Observatory did not follow up on it. On Mar. 31, while sweeping with a homemade 5" refractor at 21X, I picked up an object some seven degrees away and moving in the same direction, but <1 degree/ day. It now appears that both are the same object with earlier reported speed in error.

This comet came 760 hours following my previous find in August 1988. Despite the excitement of the discovery, the most significant event of the week was the arrival of our new infant son, Mark, the following day. To top this off, I received an offer for a better job the next day.

Comet 1992d will be closest the sun at 1.26 AU on Apr 22. It moves north, under the North Pole, into the evening sky by mid-June, never being more than 50 degrees from the sun.

## 21 March Astronomy Class
Milpitas Library
Reported by Paul Barton

Jack Peterson gave his usual fine presentation to a dozen or so very attentive students - - - in spite of heavy rain! Subjects covered were Earth's precession over the years, double stars, size of nearby stars, compared to our

---

| **Offices and Board of Directors** | | **Ephemeris Contributors** | |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Pres: Jack Zeiders -** | 408-281-0220 | **Don Machholtz -** | 916-346-8963 |
| **Vice Pres: Paul Marotzke** | 408-446-0738 | **Pat Donnelly -** | 408-778-2741 |
| **Treas: Jack Peterson-** | 408-262-1457 | **Richard Stanton -** | 408-662-0205 |
| **Sec: Jim Van Nuland-** | 408-371-1307 | **Steve Gotlib -** | 415-525-7668 |
| **Dir: Gene Cisneros-** | 408-923-6800 | **Bill Dellinger -** | 510-792-9206 |
| **Dir: Del Johnson-** | 408-448-0239 | | |
| **Dir: Steve Greenberg-** | 209-239-2154 | **Editor** | |
| **Dir: Paul Barton-** | 408-377-0148 | **Bob Madden -** | 408-264-4488 |
| **Dir: Bob Madden-** | 408-264-4488 | | |

---

## EPHEMERIDES

### COMET SHOEMAKER-LEVY (1991a₁)

| DATE (UT) | RA (2000) DEC | ELONG | SKY | MAG |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 05-03 | 00h56.8m +40°43' | 34° | M | 11.6 |
| 05-08 | 01h01.3m +42°22' | 36° | M | 11.3 |
| 05-13 | 01h06.1m +44°14' | 38° | M | 11.0 |
| 05-18 | 01h11.4m +46°19' | 41° | M | 10.7 |
| 05-23 | 01h17.3m +48°41' | 43° | M | 10.4 |
| 05-28 | 01h24.2m +51°22' | 45° | M | 10.0 |
| 06-02 | 01h32.5m +54°28' | 48° | M | 9.7 |
| 06-07 | 01h43.3m +58°04' | 50° | M | 9.3 |

### COMET TANAKA-MACHHOLZ (1992d)

| DATE (UT) | RA (2000) DEC | ELONG | SKY | MAG |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 04-23 | 23h15.3m +40°31' | 46° | M | 8.2 |
| 04-28 | 23h36.3m +45°31' | 47° | M | 8.2 |
| 05-03 | 00h00.8m +50°18' | 47° | M | 8.2 |
| 05-08 | 00h29.9m +54°43' | 47° | M | 8.3 |
| 05-13 | 01h04.3m +58°45' | 47° | M | 8.4 |
| 05-18 | 01h44.2m +61°43' | 47° | M | 8.5 |
| 05-23 | 02h29.6m +63°59' | 46° | M | 8.6 |
| 05-28 | 03h17.4m +65°18' | 45° | M | 8.8 |
| 06-02 | 04h05.1m +65°40' | 44° | M | 8.9 |
| 06-07 | 04h49.7m +65°16' | 43° | M | 9.1 |

Don Machholz (916) 346-8963

---

sun, Leo and other constellations near to Leo. Attendees were:

Bob Madden
Mark Brenizer
Diana Brenizer
Dan Finley
Alice Finley

Richard Paw
Jerry Lovelace
Alex Calderon
Leon Jones
Garry Mitchell
John Bettencourt
Paul Barton

---

## TIME AGAIN FOR THE GREAT SJAA AUCTION
**MAY 2ND AT HOUGE PARK - 2:00PM TIL DONE**

BRING YOUR GOOD STUFF AND WHITE ELEPHANTS FOR SALE
ALSO YOUR POCKET BOOKS AND CHECK BOOKS

Call the SJAA hotline or Jim Van Nuland for more information
or call one of your Board of Directors

---

**EPHEMERIS** | **Page 2** | **May 1992**

=== PAGE 3 ===
# Flashing Telrad
- by Richard Green

## 6 to 9 Volts Switched

This circuit shows how to modify a TELRAD so that it may be used on very faint objects.

## NOTES:

The LED that illuminates the TELRAD is polarity sensitive. Mark the wires coming from this device (+/-) before disconnecting.

The TELRAD switch/control has a 50Ω resistor connected to it. This resistor should be removed as it is no longer necessary.

The Radio Shack part number for the TLC555 device is 276-1718. Total cost for all parts should be less than $5.00.

---

## SJAA OBSERVATORY STRUCTURE DESIGN TEAM REPORT
by Jerry Dunmire

A team has been formed to consider structures for the SJAA observatory at the proposed Grant Ranch site. The members are Andy Guidas, Mike Ficcio, Marty Hutchison and myself.

We have met twice. During our initial meeting, we discussed the priorities for the observatory. Our second meeting was at the proposed Grant Ranch site to review the physical layout of the site.

Various features are being considered, including those on the list printed in the April Ephemeris. Tradeoffs are being made between the features by applying the following priorities and assumptions:

- The facilities primary purpose is public service.
- Groups of 20 to 40 will attend the public observing sessions. Though the observatory itself need only have room for 3 to 4 people at a time. There must be provisions for flow of foot traffic with staging areas to deal with large groups.
- Handicap access must be provided.
- The telescope will be a Schmidt-Cass of 10 or 11".
- The structure should be designed to allow for simple expansion or duplication to support a second telescope.
- The structure should fit the "Park" environment.
- The structure should be designed and built for low maintainence.
- Keep it simple.

The design team will continue to consult with and solicit advice and suggestions from all interested parties. Please feel free to call me at (408) 248-1451.

---

## RAISIN BREAD
by Bob Madden

I was talking to Jack Z at the last General Meeting (4/11) and lamenting how our membership displays low attendance at these meetings. Jack said we should provide a little write-up of the talks. Let me say this, you miss some really informative discussions when you fail to attend. Ethan Clifton's talk about his closed aperture dome started considerable discussion over what the SJAA wanted and needed. Dr. Schramm's discussion using raisin bread clarified my perception of the Big Bang. Bill Dellinges' discussion about astronomy seminars was very interesting. This month we will have John Gleason telling us about astrophotography. John is well recognized in this field and has his photographs published in Sky and Telescope. Don't miss him! Dr. Romani from Stanford will tell us about Neutron Stars, Black Holes and Cosmology in June. This has been a very impressive line up. To get these folks back we need to show interest and support.

---

**EPHEMERIS**  
**Page 3**  
**May 1992**

=== PAGE 4 ===
# SJAA Public Star Party Site

[Map showing location with streets: Hillsdale Ave, Camden Ave, Woodard Ave, Union Ave, Twilight Ave, Bascom Ave, and Highway 17, with Houge Park marked]

---

# SJAA AUCTION ASTRONOMICAL ITEMS MIRRORS - LENSES - EYE-PIECES - MOUNTS - AND COMPLETE TELESCOPES

**10% OF YOUR SALE WILL GO TO THE SJAA**

**BRING YOUR STUFF. SELL AND BUY NEW ITEMS FOR YOUR SHELVES AND GARAGE.**

## May 2nd 2:00 pm - Houge Park

---

**EPHEMERIS**

**Page 4**

**May 1992**

=== PAGE 5 ===
# CELESTIAL CALENDAR

## Lunar/Phases Date Rise Tran Set
- NM 10:44hr 02-05 0605 1232 2016
- FQ 08:44hr 09-05 1246 1919 0153
- FM 09:03hr 16-05 2036 0121 0606
- LQ 08:53hr 24-05 0129 0716 1301
- NM 20:57hr 31-05 0528 1245 2007

## Nearer Planets
- Mercury 07-05 0524 1130 1740
- 1.21 AU 17-05 0532 1201 1833
- Mag -1.1 27-05 0538 1242 1951

- Venus 07-05 0550 1224 1902
- 1.71AU 17-05 0545 1234 1927
- Mag -3.9 27-05 0542 1244 1950

- Mars 07-05 0408 1002 1600
- 1.83 AU 17-05 0348 0952 1601
- Mag +1.0 27-05 0329 0942 1601

- Jupiter 07-05 1338 2014 0252
- 5.19 AU 17-05 1301 1936 0214
- Mag -2.1 27-05 1225 1859 0136

- Saturn 07-05 0201 0709 1216
- 9.73 AU 17-05 0122 0631 1138
- Mag +0.7 27-05 0043 0552 1059

## SOL Star Type G2V Mag - 26.72
- 0306+1659 07-05 0610 1306 2003
- 0344+1927 17-05 0601 1304 2011
- 0423+2122 27-05 0553 1303 2017

## Astronomical Twilight
- JD 2,448,749.5 07-05 0423 - 2149
- .7\59.5 17-05 0410 - 2201
- .769.5 27-05 0358 - 2211

## Siderial Time
- Transit Right 07-05 0000 PDT=1354
- Ascention at 17-05 0000 PDT=1433
- Local Midnight 27-05 0000 PDT=1513

## Darkest Saturday Night May 02
- Sunset 1958
- Twilight End 2141
- Moon Rise 2016

**TIMES AND DATES ARE PACIFIC DAYLIGHT**

---

**Note: Membership dues will increase to $12- on July 1st This is the first increase in 10 years**

---

# ASTRO ADS

**ASTRO ADS** are free to all noncommercial advertisers wishing to sell astronomically related products or services. Please send your ad directly to the Editor:

**Bob Madsen**
1616 Inglis Lane
San Jose, Ca. 95118

**NO LATER THAN THE 12TH OF EACH MONTH!** Your Astro Ad will run approximately 3-months.

**Lumicon** 1-1/4 enhanced aluminum coating mirror star diagonal; few months old, will sell for $69 firm. Edward Hillyer, 4900 N. HWY 99 SP. 238, Stockton, CA. 95212. Call (209)-931-0486 evenings.
2/92

**Celestron SC 10",** f13, w/Celestron 4" SC, Two erecting diagonals, Eyepieces - 6,10, 16 mm Cave, 12.5, 25, 40 mm Celestron, two ultra-rigid mounts - one portable one fixed. Plus 2 1/ x 3 1/2 cut film Nicon Photographic accessory. Extra film holders. $2,700 - Call Jack Connoly Tele/Fax (415)-592-7236 2/92

**For Sale.** 15 mm,19 mm Teleview Widefield, 95$ ea. 32 mm, 2" OD, Mead Super Widefield, $130. CAT (Computer Aided Telescope system) for C-11, $495. Astro Master digital setting circles for Super Polaris mount, $240. 30 mm, 1-1/4" OD Orion Ultrascopic, $58. Tuthill Polar Axis finder, $45. C-11 Motodec declination drive motor, $35. Orion Moon filter, $6. All items are in excellent condition, Jim Molinari (408)-255-7030 2/92

**IBM PC computer,** w/8087 math chip, V-20 cpu, 135 power supply, 20 meg hard disk, two 360k floppy drives. Xebec controller. Monochrome and CGA displays (IBM), APL character set on mono (hardware switch). Two extra 64k memory boards. Memory: 768 main, 1472k EMS 3.1 (configurabIe) Two printer ports, two serial ports, two-stick game port. Software: PC DOS 3.3, w/BASICA, drivers for memory management, SKYGLOBE 2.5, misc utilities. Fast boot software with source. No printer. Original shipping boxes. $350 takes all, or what have you? Call Jim Van Nuland, (408)-371-1307 11 AM to 11PM.
2/92

**Celestron C8 Schmidt - Cassigrain.** Drive system with Joy stick with declination and right assention. Has startright coating, 28 mm ER eyepiece. Also optional field tripod with wedge and 6X60 finder scope. The optical system is perfect! For $1,000. Call Syd Goldstein (408)-929-6706 (H) 5262

**8-inch Celestron Schmidt Camera.** F/1.5, field 4.5X6.5. Two cut-film holders 90, 35 mm. Excellent optical condition, minor scratch on exterior. Makes great comet photos when attached to your telescope and mount! $1750. Dale Cruikshank (408)-446-2935. 3/92

**2 Coulter Mirrors** 10" f/5.6 - Matched focal lengths, new in the box. $300 for both. Ed Allen (408)-438-1014 3/92

**C-8 Orange Optical Tube** assembly on a Tasco-like German Equatorial mount. 6X30 Finder, special coatings, visual back, 1-1/4 diagonal, No eyepieces. Same mount pictured on Orion Telescope Center's "Space Probe 4.5" in their catalog, but w/o motor hook-up linkage. Nice slow motion controls. Ideal for travel and quick set up gazing sessions. Super RFT when used with Celestron F6.3 reducer/corrector. Tube assembly in near mint condition. **Price Reduced!** - $650 firm. Bill Dellinger (510) 792-9205 3/92

**Lumicon 1-1/4 Newtonian Easy-Guider 100.** Celestron Cometron 60 mm RFT w/tabletop tripod, diagonal, 1-1/4 focuser w/extension tubes, 6X finder, 25 mm Kellner (12X), case, plus camera adapter: use for first scope, telephoto, or big finder, $100. Celestron 1-1/4" Barlow, $20. Meade 1-1/4" prime +e.p. projection camera adapter $18. Orion prime focus camera adapter and eyepiece projection tube for S-C's, $14 each. **Tony Amench** (408) 985-6978. 4/92

**Meade 10" SC,** GE mount, 8X50 quick removeable finder, 26mm & 10 mm eyepieces, Tuthill heated dew shield. Mount has RA drive, polar axis scope and digital setting circles. Astro Physics 5" triplet refractor, f4 field flattener/reducer for astro photography, 2" diag, mtg rings, 5" type II solar filter. Both $2500/0BO Dave Enos (408) 263-5624

---

**EPHEMERIS Page 5 May 1992**

=== PAGE 6 ===
# SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIP

**Membership only: $12   Membership / S&T: $30   Junior (under 18): $20**

Name: ___________________________________

Address: ___________________________________
         ___________________________________

Telephone: ___________________________________

Please bring this form to any
SJAA Meeting or send to
Jack Peterson, Treasurer
San Jose Astronomical Assoc.
1840 Yosemite Drive
Milpitas, CA 95035
Telephone: (408) 262-1475

**MAKE CHECKS PAYABLE TO "SJAA"**

Please check type of membership and if New or Renewal

Membership Only ___    Membership/S&T ___    Junior (under 18) ___
                       New ___    Renewal ___

---

**SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION**
**1840 YOSEMITE DRIVE**
**MILPITAS, CA. 95035**

FORWARDING AND
ADDRESS CORRECTION
REQUESTED

**NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION**

**U.S. POSTAGE PAID**

**PERMIT NO. 5381**

**SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA**

---

*SJAA HOTLINE*
*24 HOUR INFORMATION*
*408-559-1221*

---

EPHEMERIS is published monthly by the San Jose Astronomical Association - 3509 Calico Ave., San Jose California 95124, Members are encouraged to submit articles for publication. These should be typed and submitted **no later than the 12th** of the previous month. All submissions should be sent to the editor, Bob Madden, 1616 Inglis Lane, San Jose, California 95118.

---

**EPHEMERIS                                                Page 6                                                May 1992**