=== PAGE 1 ===
# SAN JOSE AMATEUR ASTRONOMERS MONTHLY BULLETIN JULY 1972

**PRES:** David Erickson  
**VICE-PRES:** Tom Halliday

**SEC:** Jerry Rattley  
**TRES:** Emmet Murphy

## BOARD OF DIRECTORS:

Ralph Bridge (72-74)  
Tom Mungall (72-74)  
Jim Eckendorf (72-73)  
Dave Aguilar (72-74)  
Tom Halliday (life)  
Trudy B. Bell (71-73)  
Dave Ambrose (71-73)

Dr. A.B. Gregory (72-73)  
Jerry Rattley (72-73)  
Norm Wild (72-73)  
Emmet Murphy (72-73)  
Dick Glasspool (72-73)  
Don Summers (71-73)  
Dave Erickson (72-74)

**The above list includes officers for the next year. To find out who the officers will be come to the banquet.**

---

## * * San Jose Amateur Astronomers * * Annual Banquet and Installation of Officers * July 16, 1972 *

July 16th is the big night. The banquet will take the place of the July meeting, and will be located at the Red Carpet Restaurant in Eastridge. At six o'clock there will be a Happy Hour, followed at seven o'clock by dinner. The dinner is a five course meal, including soup, salad, roast beef, dessert and beverage. For reservations write David Erickson, 4112 Camden Ave, San Jose, or Dr. A.B. Gregory, 5480 Fairway Dr., San Jose, 95127. Reservations must be made no later than July 10, 1972. The price is $6.25.

## PLANNING MEETING

The meeting will be at Dave Aguilar's home, 4677 Scotts Valley Dr., Scotts Valley. (Phone 438-0428) The meeting will start at eight p.m.

## STARPARTY

There will be a starparty July 8 at the Skyline site, which is located 1.8 miles past Skyline Blvd. (toward Felton) on Hwy 9. The clearing is on the left.

## FOR SALE

12½ inch f 4.1 reflector, professionally figured 1/20 wave. Deluxe Starliner Mount with drive, circles, rotating tube rings, Unitron 60 mm finder, 50 mm wide angle finder, plus miscellaneous accessories. Mint condition, $750.00. Contact R. W. Schaupp, 22295 Carta Blanca St., Cupertino, Calif. 408-732-3569