=== PAGE 1 ===
# SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION EPHEMERIS

**OCTOBER 1984**

## FROM THE EDITORS DESK

In order to continuously improve our monthly Ephemeris, I am currently looking for a wide range of subjects I would like to have a wide range of subjects covered from month to month that would be of interest to our membership and to potential members.

I would like to cover: book reviews, star party coverage, local astronomical events, upcoming eclipses, meteor showers, occultations, observing and techniques, astrophotography methods and techniques making articles would be nice.

Articles do not have to be long. In fact short, concisely written articles are just what I am looking for.

Please submit all materials to the editor by the 1st Friday of each month. If there is not room for your article then it will appear in the following month, however, I will give priority placement for time value material. If enough people contribute, I will probably expand the current Ephemeris to 8 pages.

Renewals of SJAA, JPL Astronomy and Sky & Telescope for Dec. 85 are currently getting out of these periodicals as part of your SJAA membership. Please send your subscription renewals to Jim Van Nuland for more information please call Jim at (408) 371-1307.

## KAUFMANN LECTURES ON ASTRONOMY BY: BILL DELLINGER

For the past few years Dr. William Kaufmann has offered stargazing seminars at Lake Tahoe's Sierra Nevada College using their CELESTRON - 22

Now Dr. Kaufmann will offer a similar experience this Fall at the Monterey Institute for Research in Astronomy (M.I.R.A.), using their 36-inch reflector. The observatory site is located about 10 miles east of the 5-foot mountain. Staff there state the telescope mirror is better than 1/38th wave and good observing conditions are superior to that of Cerro Tololo, Chile. The class size shall be limited to ten persons for each of the six (6) one - night sessions; the cost is $200.00 per person.

Dates are:
- SESSION IV OCT. 18 (THURSDAY NIGHT)
- SESSION V OCT. 21 (SUNDAY NIGHT)
- SESSION VI OCT. 23 (FRIDAY NIGHT)

For enrollment information, write:
Dr. William Kaufmann
385 Paraiso Drive
Danville, Calif. 94526

Or call (415) 836-9286

(Ed. note)
A guy could have a pretty good weekend in Vegas for $200.

## DEEP SKY NOTES
BY: STEVE GOTTLIEB

A few years ago at Fremont Peak with my Perkin-Elmer 8 pair of mag. 12 galaxies in Cassiopeia caught my interest, but C. Scott Houston's Deep Sky Wonders column, he had mentioned that over a dozen NGC and galaxies were nearby and sure enough I spotted a faint system to the north of the brighter pair. Unfortunately, my reference sources, including Burnham's Celestial Handbook, didn't classify this object as a member of the galaxy cluster. So the following weekend I went to the U.C. Berkeley Astronomy library and found a wealth of galaxy catalogues to aid me in identification.

The first important modern catalogue was by Harlow Shapley and Adelaide Ames. A Survey of 1249 Bright Galaxies Brighter than 13th Magnitude (1932). This list of 1249 galaxies gives photographic magnitude, diameter and Hubble type and forms the basis for the galaxy listings in Burnham's 3 volume work. An update of this catalogue titled, A Revised Shapley-Ames Catalogue of Bright Galaxies (1981) by Allan Sandage and G.A. Tammann gives recent photometric data as well as many photographs of the various Hubble types.

A more extensive work is the Reference Catalogue of Bright Galaxies (1964), by Gerard and Antoinette de Vaucouleurs. This catalogue provides information on 2,600 NGC galaxies, many of which do not appear in either the NGC or IC. This catalogue was also updated in 1976 as the Second Reference Catalogue of Bright Galaxies and contains detailed information including surface brightness, color indices, various classification types, and extensive notes.

A reference I find very useful is the Uppsala General Catalogue of Galaxies (1973) by Peter Nilson which contains information on 12,921 galaxies larger than 1 diameter. The UGC includes cross referencing to the NGC, IC and MCG numbers, position angle, types, magnitude and extensive descriptive information.

Finally, a more complete work is the volume 1 Galaxies and Clusters of Galaxies (1961-1968) by Fritz Zwicky and co-workers, Cal. Tech., Pasadena. It lists positions and magnitudes for 30,350 galaxies down to photographic magnitude 15.7 and also 9,700 clusters of galaxies. I find it very helpful that positions of cluster members and the brighter stars are accurately plotted on finder charts each covering one of 559 fields from the Palomar Sky Survey.

Incidentally, I identified my find in the CS as NGC 7623 with a Mg. 13.9, size 1.6 x 1.0, position angle 175 deg. Hubble type SO and is the faintest member of 11 charted galaxies. This cluster has more technically a Zwicky Cluster 2320.8+0845, since they I had observed 8 galaxies in the central 1 degree core down to Mg 15 0 with my 13.1", including NGC 7611,7612,7619,7623,7626,7631,7634 and IC 5309. The 1950 coordinates for NGC 7619 are 23h18m and +7d 54m. This region provides fertile hunting grounds for larger scopes. STEVE GOTTLIEB (415) 524-4678

=== PAGE 2 ===
# EVENTS CALENDAR

## SEPTEMBER 29

Fremont Peak star party.

## OCTOBER 6

General Meeting at the University of Santa Clara. This months guest speaker is Norman Sperling who will tells us about and give us answers to the "Four Great Questions of Astronomy". Meeting begins at 8 PM.

## OCTOBER 13

Board meeting and indoor star party at the Los Gatos Red Cross building. Meeting begins at 8 PM.

## OCTOBER 20

Grant Ranch Star Party. Dusk till dawn. Several members will also be testing observing site seeing conditions.

## OCTOBER 27

Fremont Peak Star Party. Dusk till dawn. Members will also be looking at site locations for a permanent observatory.

## NOVEMBER 3

Indoor Star Party at the Los Gatos Red Cross building. Begins at 8 PM.

## NOVEMBER 10

General Meeting at the University of Santa Clara. Speaker to be announced. If the membership has a speaker who they feel people would like to give a talk on any subject matter pertaining to astronomy or space science, please contact Dave Ambrose at: 415-524-0869.

## ASTRO MART

17.5" Coulter Mirror with 2 diagonals, new in box - $525

C100 refractor on heavy duty aquatorial mount. quilt, electric drive - $1,000

Six personals 1/8 - $1.25 each. 1/10 wave 12" Deltic Nova components, low profile focuser. "Prenda" tube with one 2" eyepiece and nebula filter, 60x15 finder, real beauty. $500 or best offer.

4.25" RFT 7.5, with optical window, 2" focuser - $150

6" Cave Coulter mirror, reflector tube assembly - $150

Celestron Lixan binoculars - $150

CONTACT: Phyllis Rose, 620 North 10th Street, San Jose CA 95112, PH: (408) 294-5611

Rotating rings for 12" dia. tube - $35.00

Lumicon illuminated camera adapter also for 12"dia. tube - $20

Novak 2" dia. short focuser for Newtonian type telescopes - $35

CONTACT: Jim Baumgardt at (415) 579-3821 days or (415) 347-2287 evenings and weekends.

Black Super C8 with Starbright coatings, all standard accessories plus valrable speed decreaser motor, illuminated bubble level and setting circle LED, dew cap, T-ring and Accu-Trac star corrector. $1200.

Santa Cruz, CA. 95062 (408) 462-0209

FOUND: Binoculars left in Jim Van Nulands bus at the May 84 Grant Ranch Star Party. Call Jim at (408) 371-1307

---

## BOOK REVIEW BY: DON MACHHOLZ

**"THE LIGHT-HEARTED ASTRONOMER"**  
AUTHOR: KEN FULTON  
PUBLISHED BY: ASTROMEDIA CORP, P.O. BOX 92788  
MILWAUKEE, WI. 53202  
PRICE: $5.95

Ken Fulton has written an enjoyable, clever "beginner's guide" for the amateur astronomer. While reading the book recently I found myself amused by his humorous, colloquial written insights.

Fulton has been observing the astronomy for a couple of decades and has gained considerable experience in prodding the heavens (with the Moon his favorite), dealing with mail-order firms, and teaching people about some of the pits in the "jungle" of astronomer. While reading, I was also struck by gentleness and sense of humor that adds what one is many books and which the years wide experience allows him to cover a wide variety of topics. This book contains no star maps, charts, drawings, or photographs, but Fulton's colorful writing holds the reader's attention and paves the path for anyone wishing to walk the ways of the night sky. Reading this book will not always be easy, but the rewards are great for those who "stay the course. The rewards which he writes are not money or prestige, but the on-going pleasure and satisfaction of being a confident observer impressed by a beautiful universe.

This fourteen chapter fill 115 easy-reading pages. The book can be read in one sitting, although I'd suggest that one slows down and appreciate Fulton's style. The beginning astronomer will learn a lot; while it would normally take years of mistakes to acquire. The experienced observer will be nodding in agreement and chuckling at Fulton's perceptions.

I particularly found the chapter "Observing with a Child" to be entertaining and true-to-life. The unique section entitled "Living with a Non-Astronomer Spouse" provides some sensible, sensitive suggestions. On the other hand, the chapter "The War", the author, without naming names, gives a humorously ironic recounting of an argument which occurred over telescope manufacturers in the early 1982. I feel that author could have more skillfully disguised the incident since he presents it as a fictional example. My second complaint is that while Females are strongly encouraged to join A.S.A.s, they seem to be cast them into a stereotyped mold. Some passages border on calling Fulton's humor may find this degrading.

This unique book, "The Light-Hearted Astronomer", is published by Astro Media Corp, which also publishes Astronomy magazine. Not all of has written for this periodical, so some of those articles are included in this book.

In my opinion it's a fun book to read, educational for the beginner and whimsical for the experienced amateur astronomer.

Don Machholz (408) 448-7077

---

# COMET COMMENTS

BY: DON MACHHOLZ

Two returning comets have recently been recovered, while two brighter comets remain visible at magnitudes ten and dimmer. Both have been about two magnitudes brighter than predicted, and it displayed two tails through early September. We'll look at the azumuthal/altitude positions of comets at the moment of discovery and compare the discovery time to the local astronomical twilight time.

=== PAGE 3 ===
# SJAA

## GENERAL MEETINGS:

**University of Santa Clara, Alumni Science Hall, room 102.** Heading north on Hwy 17, exit at Bascom/Washington Ave. (northj, proceed to the Bascom campus. Heading south on Hwy 17, exit at the Alameda (north), proceed to Franklin, then turn left. Go two blocks and turn left into the parking lot. Alumni Science Hall is the 3 story building that borders the east end of the parking lot. Room 102 is on the ground floor and is best gotten to by entering through the side doors on the east side of the building when walking in from the parking lot. MEETINGS BEGIN AT 8 PM.

[MAP showing location with labels: THE ALAMEDA, ALUMNI SCIENCE, ALVISO, THREE WAY, WASHINGTON, BASCOM, HWY 17]

## HENRY COE STATE PARK:

Take Hwy 101 south towards Gilroy and take the East Dunne exit. Continue east towards the hills (past Anderson Reservior). For about 11 miles to the park. Past the park entrance you will see old ranch buildings on the right and the Coe Ranch on the left. The ranger station club combination is 4565. Always lock the gate after yourself if arriving after dark, please park outside the gate and hike in first to find an observing site before driving in. Parking lights only after dark, please.

[MAP showing location with labels: ANDERSON RESERVOIR, COE, BYPASS SECTION, HWY 101 SOUTH, GILROY]

## INDOOR STAR PARTIES:

**Los Gatos Red Cross Building**, 18011 Los GatosSaratoga Rd., Los Gatos. From Hwy 17 south, take the Hwy 101 south (Saratoga) exit and continue on Hwy 9/Los Gatos Saratoga Road for about two miles. Turn right at Rose Avenue and turn right immediately into the parking lot of the Red Cross Building. OPEN AT 8 PM.

[MAP showing Los Gatos-Saratoga RD with HWY 17 and Red Cross building location]

## GRANT RANCH COUNTY PARK:

This site is a new one for the SJAA so come and try it out. Located on Mt. Hamilton Road, halfway between San Jose and Lick Observatory. To get to Mt. Hamilton Road, take (in either direction) to Alum Rock Rd. Go east up Alum Rock Road to Mt. Hamilton Rd. and follow it. Grant ranch is on the left, just past the intersection of Mt. Hamilton and Quimby Roads. After sunset the park front gate will be locked with the SJAA's combination lock. Use the sequence 4565 to open. But be sure to lock the gate behind you, coming or going. There are two gates, the lock may be on the exit gate. If so enter the park from this gate.

[MAP showing Grant Ranch Park location with labels: To Lick Obs., MT. HAMILTON RD., GRANT RANCH PARK, QUIMBY RD., HWY 680, To Hwy 101]

## FREMONT PEAK STATE PARK:

Take Hwy 101 south towards Salinas. Take Hwy 156 east (San Juan Bautista) for two miles to a yellow flashing light. Turn right and go about 25 miles to where road curves slightly to the left and splits. Stay left for about 4.9 miles to the next split and go right again. Follow road for about 11 miles up into the park. SJAA sets up at Coulter Camp overflow area. It's visible as you drive up into main area of camp. Parking lights only after dark, please.

[MAP showing location with labels: FREMONT PEAK, COULTER CAMP, To SALINAS, HWY 101 S., YELLOW LIGHT, HWY 156 E., SAN JUAN BAUTISTA]

## EPHEMERIS

EPHEMERIS is published monthly by the San Jose Astronomical Association. 3905 Calico Ave., San Jose, Cas. 95124

### OFFICERS:

**PRESIDENT** Dave Ambrose 816 Everett St, El Cerrito, CA. 94530 (415) 524-0869

**Vice-Pres** Denni Medlock 15022 Broadway Terrace, Oakland, CA. 95124 (415) 654-6796

**Sec.** Anne C. Nulund 3509 Calico Ave., San Jose, CA. 95124 (408) 371-1307

**Treas.** Robert Fingerhut 340 Rio Verde Place, #4, Milpitas, CA. 95035 (408) 263-4455

### BOARD OF DIRECTORS:

Paul Mancuso (408) 946-0738, Steve Greenberg (415) 443-6638, Tom Ahl (408) 997-1383, Gene Cisneros (408) 923-6800, Joe Sunseri, Chris Pratt (408) 629-2094

**EPHEMERIS EDITOR:** John Gleason 5361 Port Sailwood Dr., Newark, CA. 94560

=== PAGE 4 ===
# THE SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION

## MEMBERSHIP BENEFITS

### Deep-sky observing Astronomy Computerized Telescope making Eclipses
astronomy. Whatever your astronomical interests you'll find people in the San Jose Astronomical Association who will enjoy sharing their knowledge with you.

## ACTIVITIES

The SJAA sponsors an activity every Saturday night (except around certain holidays).

Regular meetings featuring programs on various astronomical topics are held once a month at the Alumni Science Building at the University of Santa Clara.

Star Parties--Deep observing sessions--are held at several different locations, some close by and some Jose area, and some in the adjacent mountains.

"Indoor Star Parties" provide an informal opportunity to show slides, work on equipment exchange ideas, etc. They are held in the Los Gatos Red Cross building.

You need not be a member of the San Jose Astronomical Association to participate in activities, but membership does grant certain advantages:

**Twelve months of Sky and Telescope magazine** and reduced rates on products from Sky Publishing Corporation.

**Explanations,** our monthly newsletter, containing a calendar of events and activities and other items of interest. Use of club telescopes. (Both reflectors and refractors are available.) Access to the SJAA's library of books, magazines, and pamphlets.

The San Jose Astronomical Association, founded in 1954, is a non-profit group devoted to expanding the general public's interest in astronomy, conducting research within the capabilities of amateurs, and promoting the science of astronomy.

---

**MEMBERSHIP ONLY: $8.00**    **MEMBERSHIP/S&T: $21.00**    **JUNIOR (UNDER 12): $15.00**

---

# SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION

Name ________________________________

Address ________________________________

________________________________

Telephone (_____)________________________________

Please bring this form to any SJAA meeting, or send to:
Robert Fingerhut, Treas.
San Jose Astronomical Association
340 Rio Verde Pl. #4, Milpitas, CA 95035

[Phone: (408) 263-4455]

Membership: Adult ___ Junior (under 18) ___
*Bulletin* Subscription only: ___

## Questionnaire (optional)

What are your astronomical interests (e.g. astro-photography, deep-sky observation, telescope making, etc.)? ________________________________

________________________________

________________________________

Do you own a telescope? ________ If so, what kind?

________________________________

Is there any specific area of astronomy that you feel qualified to help others with? ________________________________

________________________________

________________________________

=== PAGE 5 ===
# PERIODIC COMET AREND-RIGAUX (1984k)

J. Gibson used the 48" Schmidt instrument to recover this comet on August 7. The comet was magnitude 18.5 and in the constellation Taurus. It's orbital period is 6.8 years and it will be closest the Sun (1.4 AU) on Dec. 1. At that time it will be eleventh magnitude in the morning sky. I'll print it's ephemeris next month.

# PERIODIC COMET GEHRELS 3 (1984i)

J. Gibson recovered this comet too, a couple of hours after the previous comet, which was only 25 degrees away. It will be closest the Sun (4.25 AU) on July 14 and on June 1985 it is presently magnitude 20, but is not expected to get brighter than mag. 16. It's orbital period is 8.1 years.

# HALLEY'S COMET ON OCTOBER 15:

RA: 06h; 44.9m. Dec: +10°43' 35.3". Distance from the Sun: 5.97 AU. Distance from the Earth: 5.72 AU. Magnitude: 18.1

## DATE

R.A.H. (1950) Dec. Elong. Mag.

## Comet Austin (1984i)

| 09-27 | 07h 49.7m | +38°27' | 72° | 8.3 |
| 10-02 | 07h 24.3m | +41°37' | 82° | 8.5 |
| 10-07 | 06h 52.5m | +44°46' | 93° | 8.6 |
| 10-12 | 06h 13.6m | +47°32' | 105° | 8.8 |
| 10-17 | 05h 16.2m | +49°16' | 117° | 9.0 |
| 10-22 | 04h 21.0m | +49°16' | 130° | 9.2 |
| 10-27 | 03h 24.2m | +47°23' | 141° | 9.5 |
| 11-01 | 02h 37.3m | +43°55' | 150° | 9.8 |
| 11-06 | 02h 00.3m | +39°50' | 154° | 10.2 |
| 11-11 | 01h 32.2m | +35°44' | 153° | 10.5 |

Fading in the morning sky, this comet approaches, then recedes from the Earth this month as it pulls away from the Sun. Try to see how faint a comet you can detect. Soon it may appear about 4" across and diffuse as it fades into the evening sky by early November.

## Periodic Comet Takamizawa (1984J)

| 09-27 | 21h 17.0m | -24°37' | 130° | 11.5 |
| 10-02 | 21h 23.2m | -24°25' | 126° | 11.7 |
| 10-07 | 21h 23.1m | -24°03' | 122° | 11.9 |
| 10-12 | 21h 23.2m | -23°48' | 119° | 12.0 |
| 10-17 | 21h 34.5m | -23°24' | 115° | 12.2 |
| 10-22 | 21h 49.4m | -22°55' | 111° | 12.4 |
| 10-27 | 21h 46.1m | -22°22' | 109° | 12.5 |
| 11-01 | 21h 52.1m | -21°52' | 104° | 12.7 |
| 11-06 | 21h 53.4m | -21°17' | 101° | 12.9 |

This comet is pulling away from the Earth and Sun. The mag. exit may be off a bit, because the comet seems to be unstable and another outburst may occur at any time.

# PAST DISCOVERIES

We often picture new comets being discovered just above the horizon, at astronomical twilight, while it is true that comets are in greater supply near the Sun than away from the Sun (as seen from Earth), a steady rate of comet's discovered by amateur astronomers do occur at any hour. In fact many are found high in the sky. Additionally, they are usually found at times far removed from astronomical twilight, when the sky is quite dark.

Here are the results of a study on the 38 discoveries of these 28 comets. The time of day of the observer's local horizon when the comet was entered into a computer, along with the comet's position. The printout, summarized here, shows the azimuth and altitude of the comet at discovery as seen from the discoverer's location. The difference between the time of discovery and the time when the altitude of the comet and Sun is 18 deg. below the observer's horizontal is given in minutes.

# EVENINGS

```
ALT.30--+---0--+---+---0--+---0--+---0--+30
        0   0   0   1   0   0   0
70------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+70
        0   0   0   0   1   1   0
50------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+50
        0   0   0   1   1   0   0
30------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+30
        1   0   0   1   2   2   0
10------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+10
        0   0   0   1   0   0   0
00------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+00
        180 210 240 270 300 330 360
        S                           N
                AZUMITH
Ave. Azumuth: 254.9°
Ave. Altitude: 31.9°
Ave. time after Ast. Twi.: 77.5 minutes.
```

# MORNINGS

```
ALT.30--+---0--+---+---0--+---0--+---0--+30
        0   0   0   0   0   0   0
70------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+70
        0   0   0   0   0   0   0
50------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+50
        0   0   2   0   3   1   2
30------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+30
        0   0   5   0   5   6   0
10------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+10
        0   0   1   0   0   1   0
00------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+00
        0   30  60  90 120 150 180
        N                           S
                AZUMITH
Ave. Azumith: 039.3°
Ave. Altitude: 24.2°
Ave. time before Ast. Twi.: 44.7 minutes.
```

# SPACE UPDATE

BY: ROBERT FINGERHUT

## DISCOVERY COMPLETES FIRST FLIGHT

The space shuttle Discovery was launched on August 30 and returned to Earth on Sept. 5. Discovery is in excellent condition after its landing at Edwards AFB. All mission objectives were accomplished except that the communications satellites were deployed. Two users for payload bay structure module PAM-D2 upper stage, demonstrating its return to reliability. The Navy Leasat was deployed using a new "Frisbee" deployment technique (DCZ). A solar array was also tested. The foray into the next stage of development for future missions of a space station was tested by its structural stability. An unidentified hormone was produced in continuous flow electrophoresis unit. This experiment was saved after automatic equipment failed in the payload specialist, who was one of two payload specialists. One made no payload repairs and operated it on manual. The drug produced will remain confidential until human testing begins in 1985. A high school students project was used to measure the fluids experiment apparatus (FEA) which may be used to perform industrial and commercial separation. First crystal was grown in space in an iridium crystal using float zone processing in which an annular heater is moved along a rod continually melting a section and pushing impurities along in front of it. An IMAX camera was also carried on this flight for preservation of a film by the Smithsonian Institution.

## TEACHER TO FLY ON THE SHUTTLE

President Reagan has announced that the first person selected for the shuttle flight participant program will be an elementary or secondary school teacher. The teacher will fly on the space shuttle by late 1985 or early 1986.

=== PAGE 6 ===
# SPACE UPDATE

## CHALLENGER SCHEDULED FOR OCT. 1 LAUNCH

The shuttle Challenger's next flight, 41-G, is scheduled for a launch on October 5th with a crew of 5 men and 2 women on a mission of 8 days. It will feature a large Canadian/Earth viewing payload and a space walk to practice for November's satellite retrievals. The flight crew will be Robert Crippen, Commander, Jon A. McBride, Pilot, Mission Specialist Dr. Kathryn D. Sullivan (first American woman spacewalker), Mission Specialist David C. Leestma and payload specialist Marc Garneau from Canada and Paul D. Scully-Power, a U.S. Navy civilian.

## DISCOVERY'S SECOND FLIGHT SCHEDULED FOR NOV. 2

On this flight, 51-A, Discovery will take up a crew of five on an 8 day flight that will take several scientific payloads. It will also retrieve the Palapa B-2 and Westar-VI satellites which were put into the wrong orbit by PAM-D failures on mission 41-B. It will carry a crew of 6 for a duration of 6 days. The crew will include Frederick H. Hauck, Commander, David M. Walker, pilot, and Mission Specialist's Anna L. Fisher, Dale A. Gardner and Joseph P. Allen.

## EUROPE OFFERS "COLUMBUS" TO U.S. SPACE STATION

A German and Italian company have formed a partnership to produce the Columbus module. The module is a free-flying version of the European Spacelab that would orbit in parallel with the U.S. space station. The plan is to build the Columbus module rather than subcontract for actual space station components. It would offer them more independence for the U.S. and to develop technology that could eventually allow them to launch their own space station.

---

# CALICO OBSERVATORY

BY: JIM VAN NULAND

As the Jupiter-watching season draws to a close, the Spot is quickly going. I've included the few times for which it is available that month; this will be the final article and next year when Jupiter comes around again.

The broken record continues: Good, steady seeing is still mandatory for seeing the Spot. Despite the somewhat faded condition, Paul Maxson of Phoenix was able to photograph it on August 11th. So how will I see you next year. Let me know of your results: Clear Skies, Jim Van Nuland

### Great Red Spot on Meridian -- PDT/PST

| Date | Time | Date | Time |
|------|------|------|------|
| W 10 3 | 7:29 pm | Sa 10 27 | 7:29 pm |
| F 10 5 | 9:11 pm | Th 11 1 | 5:39 pm |
| W 10 10 | 8:15 pm | Th 11 8 | 6:30 pm |
| M 10 15 | 7:29 pm | Tu 11 13 | 5:37 pm |
| M 10 22 | 8:15 pm | Su 11 25 | 5:35 pm |

---

Commercial ads are priced according to size and may be placed by contacting: Gene Cisneros at (408) 923-6800.

## ATM coatings

**15022 BROADWAY TERRACE, OAKLAND, CA 94611**

Specializing in Aluminum Coatings with silicon monoxide over-coating for telescope mirrors.

| Size | Price |
|------|-------|
| 4¼" | $8.00 |
| 6" | $12.00 |
| 8" | $16.00 |
| 10" | $20.00 |
| 12¼" | $24.00 |
| 14¼" | $28.00 |
| 16" | $50.00 |

Secondaries, when sent with primary mirror, free
To remove old coatings $3.00 Minimum charge $8.00
Include postage and insurance for return mail
Mirror will be shipped in container received

---

## LUMICON®

*"Innovation in Astronomy"*

Visit or call LUMICON
for the most complete selection
of IN STOCK Telescopes and
Accessories in the West.

**WORLD CENTER FOR**
★ **ASTROPHOTOGRAPHY** ★

(415) 447-9570
2111 Research Dr. #5E,
Livermore CA 94550

---

**SJAA EPHEMERIS**
**3509 CALICO AVE**
**SAN JOSE, CA 95124**

**BULK RATE**
**U.S. POSTAGE PAID**
**PERMIT NO. 5381**
**SAN JOSE, CA. 95125**

---

*TIME VALUE—DATED*
*NEWS MATERIAL*