=== PAGE 1 ===
# SAN JOSE AMATEUR ASTRONOMERS

## FEBRUARY 1976

### Officers:
- **President: Tom Mungall** - 257-3262
- **Vice-president: Norm Wild** - 252-8966
- **Secretary: Bob Malm** - 941-1343
- **Treasurer: Gerry Rattley** - 732-0202

# BULLETIN

**Board Members:**
- Dave Erickson
- A.B. Gregory
- Debbie Moore
- Jim Vermilion
- Jack Zeiders

---

**RECENT ACTIVITIES:** January was a bad month for your organization. The general meeting was cancelled because we could find no site for the meeting. Lack of communication plus internal upheaval at the University prevented our using the observatory there for a meeting on Jan. 9 and we were pre-empted on that same date at Olinder. A meeting on the Jan. 2 date was thought to be too close to the Holidays for good attendance plus the fact the speaker couldn't make it on that date anyway. We have reached no agreement on the renewal of out Mt. Umunhum lease and the outlook remains pessimistic. A negotiation on another possible site fell through. There remains, however, a note of optimism: Things can't get worse so they will have to get better. I have no report on the star party except from those who did not attend.

---

### COMING EVENTS:

**January 31, 1976 at Henry Coe State Park:** Star party. Note that February's star party actually occurs at the end of January, the nearest date to new moon.

**February 6, 1976, 7:30 P.M. at Olinder Center:** General meeting. Your Bulletin editor will talk on "Algorithms in Astronomy for the Layman." In addition he will exhibit charts showing the sky as seen from other local programs. Gerry Rattley will round out the evening with a Skalnate Pleso star chart discussion.

**February 7, 1976:** Alternate star party date if weather prevents the star party of Jan. 31. If this star party materializes, that fact plus the location will be announced at the General Meeting.

**Jan. 30, 1976:** Special star party for elementary students and their parents at Hoover Elementary School in San Jose - Barnhart near Primrose almost to Saratoga, 7:30 Pm.

**Feb. 28, 1976 at Coe Park:** The "March" new moon star party.

**March 3, 1976(A WEDNESDAY) at 8 P.M:** Board meeting at Dave Erickson's house.

---

**CLUB LIBRARY:** Many of us do not know that the San Jose Amateur Astronomers has a rather extensive library of astronomical texts, magazines, booklets, etc. Beginning this month I will start to publish the list of materials in our library. Should you be interested in borrowing any of these books, contact me before the general meeting of any month (941-1343) and I will bring your selection to the meeting.

---

**AMATEUR TELESCOPE MAKING; BOOK TWO** -- Albert Ingalls, Editor  
**AMATEUR TELESCOPE MAKING; BOOK THREE** -- Ingalls, Editor

**AN INTRODUCTION TO ASTRONOMY**, Baker and Fredrick  
**THE WIDER UNIVERSE**, Paul Couderc  
**DYNAMIC ASTRONOMY**, Robert Dixon  
**THE NATURE OF THE PHYSICAL WORLD**, Sir Arthur Eddington  
**EXPLORING SPACE WITH A CAMERA**, E.M. Cortright  
**STRANGE WORLD OF THE MOON**, V.A. Firsoff  
**ROBERT H. GODDARD -- ROCKET DEVELOPMENT -- DIARY OF THE SPACE AGE PIONEER**, Goddard et al.  
**THE FIRST BOOK OF ASTRONOMY**, Vivian Grey  
**THE LANGUAGE OF NATURE**, David Hawkins  
**SPLENDOR INTHE SKY**, Gerald Hawkins  
**ASTRONOMY, A HISTORY OF MAN'S INVESTIGATION OF THE UNIVERSE**, Fred Hoyle  
**THE FRIENDLY STARS**, Martha Martin  
**CONSIDER THE HEAVENS**, Forrest Ray Moulton  
**COLLEGE MATHEMATICS**, Kaj L. Nielsen  
**OUT OF THE SKY, AN INTRODUCTION TO METEORITICS**, H.H. Nininger  
**HOW TO SOLVE IT (A NEW ASPECT OF MATHEMATICAL METHOD)**, G. Polya **TO BE CONTINUED**

---

**CONGRATULATIONS:** To Dave Erickson for having two of his Wright-Schmidt masterpieces published in the current MERCURY, journal of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific(ASP). They are the North America and Pelican nebulae, and the Horsehead nebula.

---

# SEE YOU AT THE JAN. 31 STAR PARTY!