=== PAGE 1 ===
# *EPHEMERIS*
## *OF THE SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION*

# *APRIL 1985*

---

**APRIL 27TH**

**SJAA ASTRONOMY DAY WILL BE HELD IN THE CUPERTINO VALLCO PARK. SPORTING MALL. EXPERT ADVICE, TELESCOPE FAIR, ASTROPHOTOGRAPHY -- SEE YOU THERE!**

---

**APRIL 8** Los Gatos Red Cross building indoor Star Party. Doors open at 7 p.m. (Bad Luck) Craig Humpheries will give a short talk titled "Lunar Silhouettes". (see "Field of View" for more info).

**APRIL 12** Board Meeting at Chris Pratt's house. 7 p.m. (Pot Luck)

**APRIL 13** Field Expedition for Astronomical Observation at Fremont Peak State Park. Dusk till Dawn.

**APRIL 20** Second Annual Star Party at Henry Coe State Park. Dusk till Dawn.

**APRIL 27** ASTRONOMY DAY! at the Vallco shopping Mall in Cupertino. (see Field of View for more information).

**MAY 4** Pre-auction planning meeting at Bob Fingerhut's home. All auction consignators should attend this important meeting.

**MAY 11** 8TH ANNUAL ASTRONOMICAL AUCTION at the Los Gatos Red Cross building. Doors open at 2 p.m. Auction will begin promptly at 6 p.m.

**MAY 18** Field Expedition for Astronomical Observation at Fremont Peak State Park. Dusk till Dawn.

---

## PRESIDENTS MESSAGE
### BY: BOB FINGERHUT

As the new president of the SJAA, I would like to thank Dave Ambrose for the great job which he has done over the last two years. We all appreciate the many hours Dave has spent in efforts to secure a Non Profit tax status for the SJAA as well as working to secure land for a club owned site and observatory. I appreciate his efforts to continue to persue this effort.

In the following year I hope to see the club continue to grow. I would like to see the club put on more public programs and see more young people become active in the club.

I want to encourage all of you to let the board and I know what you would like to see the club doing. We also need more members to become active in the club. As we expand, getting up public programs need volunteers. You do not have a lot of fun showing the sky to people that have never looked through a telescope before.

I am looking forward to working with the board and you to see that we can make this club will provide enjoyment to you as well as advance public knowledge of astronomy. If you would like to help with club activities or have some idea you would like to see the club doing, please call me in the evenings at: (408) 283-4455.

---

## 1985 A.S.P. MEETING IN FLAGSTAFF

The 97th Annual Meeting of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific will be held June 22-28, 1985, on the beautiful campus of Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff. The meeting is jointly sponsored by the A.S.P. for armchair, amateur, and professional astronomers.

Among the planned activities are a symposium on comets and asteroids, a full day of nontechnical lectures on new developments in astronomy, workshops on teaching astronomy in the college and high school, and a lecture on the return of Halley's Comet. In addition, special tours are planned to Meteor Crater (including a rare decent to the crater floor with an expert on its geology), the Lowell Observatory (site of the discovery of Pluto), and an Indian archeo-astronomy site (where we hope to see an solstice light demonstration), and the Grand Canyon.

The meeting is open to everyone but pre-registration is required. For a registration packet, please write to: Summer Meeting, A.S.P., 1290 24th Ave., San Francisco, CA. 94122

---

## ASTRO ADS

New, never used Celestron 5.5" f/1.65 Schmidt Camera. With standard and filter slide finders. Adaptors for mounting to C8, C11, C14, as well as by on deg mounts. Rings for C8 and C5. List Price $1345 Selling for $700 Save: $365!!!!! Contact: John Gleason (415) 780-9350

Excellent condition Celestron 11X80 Giant Binoculars. Both modes with extra front hinge for new straight new rigidity. Variable setting, 12V adapter, Priced to Sell Set Selling for $200 Save: $164!!!!! Contact: John Gleason (415) 780-9250

FREE TO GOOD HOME: 22" Burk tube, at least 80" long, will fit 17 1/2" or 20" mirror. contact R. Rose, 408-293-6611

---

## QUESTION OF THE MONTH

What ever happened to the clubs $1000 CID camera? Bruce DeGraaf, where are you?

=== PAGE 2 ===
# FIELD OF VIEW
## BY: JOHN GLEASON

**Field of View will**
**represent the FROM THE**
**EDITORS DESK" and will**
**contain other**
**information for**
**members about past and**
**current events.**

[FIGURE: Spiral galaxy illustration]

## OBSERVATIONS

Since I have received no star party reports from members, I will include few observations from my own observing and astrophotography sessions in the last month.

Last February was my moon period was excellent for imaging. Minimal time was cool. clear evenings for warm days. I came away with 4 very fine galaxy photos taken at the 154" focus of the C14. It was also a good time to do some pie-Halley planning to see just how low on the comet will be from the peak. My 10W low will be first week in April 86', the comet will just skim the southern ridge where the 5W towers are. You can check the comet's southerly declination against the, nice chart in the March issue of **ASTRONOMY** magazine that tells us probably a good contact for Southern latitudes.

Several SJAA members are going to Australia. Your editor has reserved time on the 30" telescope on Mauna Kea during the last week in March. Others are talking about southern Texas or Arizona had also taken some. GILLESCOPE has been predicting 17th magnitude for the comet. No comet was found. Stardust Edge of the international Halley Watch reports that the comet coma is more like 23rd magnitude, not the published 17th. I did not make any attempt at photography.

## NGC 5128 in Centaurus, also known as

Centaurus-A, was easily visible on the morning of Feb 24th. In fact this was the first time I had ever seen the galaxy in any telescope. Fremont Peak was suffering from very steady and mellow 2/5 Antoniadi. (543 arcseconds of seeing!!) The galaxy was visible in the C14 with the galaxy appearing as a large faint hazy ball cut in half by a huge dark lane. It would have made a great photo, but the galaxy was going to set behind the peak in 30 min. I'll give it a try this month if the seeing prevails.

The good weather last month also gave me an opportunity to try a new E6 **HOBBIEST** kit that Kodak is marketing. It is a 3 step E6 process similar to the Unicolor process. I can both sell for around $12. The standard Kodak process kit I have is about $24/100 sq inches. Another advantage is about 10W of a full 1-stop faster than when processed in Unicolor. This is historically true for everything that I have done in the past when comparing Unicolor and Kodak development. I'll try and remember to bring by my latest astrophotos for the next general meeting.

## LUNAR SILHOUETTES

There will be a short presentation for the Red Cross meeting of April 6.

Two of our (eventual) members, Bob Hewett and Dick Humphries, have been attempting to photograph the domes of the Lick 36 inch telescope silhouetted against the face of the moon. They have used the road to our upper site, as well as the stations along Mount Hamilton Road in order to obtain the necessary azimuth. This turns out to be a rather difficult project, worse than just a lot of calculation.

Some of the Dick's talk, titled "Lunar Silhouettes", should run 15-20 minutes plus questions.

---

# GENERAL MEETING BLUE'S

Attendance at the last General Meeting was at an all time low. 15 people showed up to hear Antonio Nafariete speak on potical fabrication techniques for Schmidt corrector plates. The low attendance is not anything new. We have been averaging about 10% out of a total membership of 230. It was decided at the business meeting of the June, that all future General Meetings will be held on the first Saturday of the month at the Los Gatos Red Cross Building at 8 P.M. The Red Cross building has several advantages in that it is easy to get to. if weather accessible the SJAA has available ketchen facilities for large Also. designating the first **[ANNUAL AUCTION]** Saturday of the month should be easier for members to remember General Meeting dates. We have had many outstanding speakers in the past covering a vast range of subjects. It is unfortunate that supporting the membership missed these excellent presentations.

## ASTRONOMY DAY

Astronomy Day is coming up on April 27th. The SJAA is planing to have a display inside the Vallco shopping malls. I plan to have an astrophotography contest at the meeting. Bob Bob Longshutz plans to run his famous slide show. A few still would like to have a variety of telescopes set up in the mall covering the various types. **NEVTONIONS** [NEWTONIONS] **CATS** (ORANGE) BLACK - BLUE). With comet Halley just around the corner, there should be a lot of interest. This is a publicity event for the SJAA in years. Come and join us and share your astronomical expertise. **CONTACT:** Paul Mancuso **408-946-0738** if you would like to participate.

## ASTRONOMICAL AUCTION DATE CHANGE

Of course the biggest event for the SJAA is the May 11TH ASTRONOMICAL AUCTION. May 11th? you say. Yes. The SJAA ASTRONOMICAL AUCTION has been moved from the May 4th date to the 11th. You have been getting the information forms in your EPHEMERIS and I apologize for that. May 4th was the earliest possible date to avoid delays on the day of the auction. Last years auction went well, with a majority of the items registered ahead of time.

## EQUIPMENT

On the equipment front there is a new item from the Meade line of Lumicon is developing. If you have seen his recent ads in Sky and Telescope and Astronomy, you may have seen an item called **"SKY LOCK"**. This is a duel axis, solid state automatic tracking device for astrophotographers. My sources at Lumicon tell me that production versions are due out this summer at a selling price of $300. This unit is tracking on 8th magnitude stars and 10th magnitude red stars. The unit will be designed to interface with most drive correctors, so presumably you will not have to buy an additional box of electronics to operate the units. Of course seeing is believing, but quartz crystal controlers have largely been unsuccessful due to their inability to track on faint stars and most telescope drives. If the SKY LOCK is successful however, this device could open old up a new era of celestial photography for the amateur astronomer.

New member Al Figone of Long reports that Dew Guns are no longer available from any astronomical supplier. Hair dryers that can be plugged into your car's cigarette lighter are available from recreational vehicle suppliers. See **"Recreational Vehicles, Parts, Equipment and Supplies"** in the Yellow Pages. Price is about $7 - $10. Contact them by phone first, merchandise may have to be ordered.

=== PAGE 3 ===
# ASTROPHOTO VI

Gene Cisneros, Bob Fingerhut, Jack Peterson, Mike Corine, Steve Mandel, Harry Leitner and your editor attended the 6th astrophotographic conference California over 200 visiting amateur astronomers on display finding with outstanding demonstrations of the state of the art in amateur astrophotography. Of particular interest was the overall excellent quality of photography that is being done with 16" and smaller telescopes. The quality of the astrophotography was so good. Orange County very difficult to judge. Astronomers who sponsored the day long event.

Jean Dragesco of South Africa had a dramatic display of lunar and planetary photographs with C14. None of us had seen anything like them. He uses a French made 12" fine wide field astrographs taken with his 12" "ASTROMAC". He will sell one to you for $18,000. I brought back several of his reject prints and will share them with you at the next general meeting.

Jack Marling (LUMICON) gave a talk Advances in Color Astrophotography which described special processing for Fujichrome 400 film. You may have been fortunate to have attended a similar talk that Jack gave last summer for the SJAA.

Famous amateur Brad Wallis and Robert Provin gave us new insites into the world of optical ray tracing. They tested several 8" F/5.6 optical systems to determine the best off-axis imaging. Their conclusion: The Concentric Schmidt Cassegrain is the best, with the classic Newtonian coming in second place and the R/C in third. The SCT Concentric Schmidt is not to be confused with the popular orange, black or blue cats that many of us own.

## 1985 R.T.M.C.

The 1985 Riverside Telescope Makers Conference is coming up on the weekend of May 24., 25 and 26th. More information is available from Cliff Holmes, 8642 Wells Ave., Riverside, CA. 92505, (714) 689-6883.

## NEW ASSOCIATION OFFICERS

The SJAA Board of Directors have elected Bob Fingerhut to the position of President, with Dave Ambrose as Vice President. Bob will be a tough act to follow for our next president, and Jim Van Nuland continues as our Secretary. And --- as for our Board of Directors, they all remain the same as a result of the February elections. Congratulations to all.

# COMET COMMENTS BY: DON MACHHOLZ

[THIS IS FIGURE: A circular diagram showing a crosshair or targeting reticle]

We are well into the year with no new comets discovered nor returning. One comet is visible: Halley's Comet which nearly discovered year ago is brightening in the southern sky.

As seen from Earth, this comet moves through Lupus and Centaurus: Far south, it moves into the evening sky this month.

## DATE R.A. (1950) DEC. ELONG. MAG.

### Comet Shoemaker (1984f)

| Date | RA | Dec | Elong | Mag |
|------|-------|---------|-------|-----|
| 03-26 | 15h 38.8m | -30°50' | 124° | 11.0 |
| 04-05 | 15h 18.2m | -33°18' | 137° | 10.8 |
| 04-15 | 14h 50.9m | -35°34' | 148° | 10.6 |
| 04-25 | 14h 18.8m | -37°17' | 156° | 10.4 |
| 05-05 | 13h 40.8m | -38°07' | 155° | 10.3 |

# WHAT GOES AROUND COMES AROUND - HALLEY'S COMET

Halley's Comet is slowly brightening in the evening sky as it continues to move towards the sun while the earth moves away from it. As seen from the earth it will disappear into the solar glare by month's end. The comet is now roughly magnitude 18. In December and January the comet will be in the morning sky at mag. 13. Listed below are its positions, distances in millions of miles.

## DATE R.A. (1950) DEC. DIS. TO SUN AND EARTH

| Date | RA | Dec | Sun | Earth |
|------|----------|-----------|-------|-------|
| 03-26 | 04h 51.1m | +14°36.6' | 416.6 | 441.5 |
| 03-31 | 04h 51.2m | +14°45.4' | 412.0 | 444.6 |
| 04-05 | 04h 51.6m | +15°02.4' | 407.3 | 447.4 |
| 04-10 | 04h 52.4m | +15°15.4' | 402.7 | 449.8 |
| 04-15 | 04h 53.4m | +15°45.3' | 397.9 | 451.9 |
| 04-20 | 04h 54.5m | +15°41.1' | 393.2 | 453.5 |
| 04-25 | 04h 56.2m | +16°53.9' | 388.5 | 454.6 |
| 04-30 | 04h 57.9m | +16°06.4' | 383.6 | 455.0 |
| 05-05 | 04h 59.9m | +16°18.7' | 378.9 | 455.0 |

Comet Halley is near the boarder of Aries and Taurus, moving only about 3 degrees all month.

How do you pronounce the comet's name? The popular way is to call it "hay-lee", as in the rock group "Bill Haley and the Comets", however, it is spelled the same as actor Bill Gale and, besides, he usually spelled his name differently-with two L's. The more accurate pronunciation is "hal-lee", rhyming with "Sally", or "alley", this is used by most astronomers and is slowly catching on with the public.

While astronomers (professional and amateur) generally understand what Halley's will be doing this year and next, the public still has misconceptions. Some people don't know the comet is visible before the year is out. Others are still presuming it will be bright naked-eye object as observed through their living room windows. Hopefully, the professional astronomers speaking through the press will alleviate some of the ignorance, but we, be it to us, the amateurs, to show neighbors: Most people will not friends and unless they are handed a pair of binoculars pointed to the comet. Now would be a good time to begin planning public observing session# for yourself and your astronomy club.

My wife has already asked me to bring my telescope to her place of employment next winter so that her co-workers will see Halley's Comet. In addition to this, I am also planning on inviting my neighbors over next month to view the comet. Other possibilities include: Setting up at the far end of parking lots during Christmas shopping season, placing your scope in an open area along evening or morning commute hours, positioning yourself at a public school (and inviting a few classes) or at the city park, reminding you of an location of some ideas appropriate to your location.

Another series of star parties could be for the club members in particular and sky takers place at remote dark-sky sites. During New Moon the comet will appear at its best and you can make judgement on the merits of a wide variety of telescopes and binoculars. Magnitude estimates and comet appearance can be judged through various instruments, along with drawings and photo sessions.

When should these sessions be held? Below are calendar suggestions on when and where exactly where the comet will be. We can now only guess as to its brightness and appearance.

=== PAGE 4 ===
# SPACE PROGRAM UPDATE
# BY: BOB FINGERHUT

## SHUTTLE LAUNCH SCHEDULE CHANGED

**Mission 51-F has been cancelled due to design flaws in the tracking DAY relay satellite. The primary payload, Data Communications satellite, Canada's "Anik" D-1 communication satellite, will be flown on mission 51-D. Other payloads on 51-D will be the Navy/Hughes Syncom A satellite and an electrophoresis machine. Retrieval of the Long Duration Exposure Facility and a French payload were moved to 51-I, the June flight. Thus, the flight. The 51-D mission is now scheduled for launch on the Discovery no earlier than April 19. This is due to an accident in which a work bucket fell, damaging one of the payload bay doors.**

## VANDENBERG LAUNCH COMPLEX CHECKED OUT

**A space shuttle vehicle, including the orbiter Enterprise, was assembled on the launch pad at Vandenberg to verify facilities. The first launch is scheduled for no earlier than Jan 28, 1986 with the orbiter Discovery.**

## CRYSTAL GROWTH EXPERIMENTS TO FLY ON SHUTTLE

**Several U.S. drug companies and universities have signed with NASA to fly hundreds of protein crystal growth experiments. This project is being rushed to key flight stage because of its potential for key medical and commercial benefits.**

## WILD-2 TARGETED FOR COMET RENDEZVOUS

**NASA will drop a penetrator on the surface of comet Wild-2 if a planned 1990 to new start is approved. The launch would be in march 1991.**

## PRESIDENT ISSUES DIRECTIVE ON SPACE LAUNCHERS

**A presidential directive has mandated increased utilization of the space shuttle by the U.S. Air Force and initiation of an effort that could lead to the development of a second generation space shuttle. In a related move, the U.S. Air Force has received authorization to purchase ten Titan 34D7 SRM-X space shuttle derivatives to be alternates to military booster for 1988 through 1993. Ten of these boosters will be produced.**

## FY 1986 NASA BUDGET

**Highlights of the proposed 1986 NASA budget include:**

1. **A 6-9 month stretchout in space station development.**

2. **A new start of an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV). This is the reusable upper stage under development. The OMV would deploy lb. payloads as far as 1500 miles from the space shuttle. It is planned for first flight in 1990.**

3. **No new start for a fifth shuttle orbiter. Competition from the Ariane and commercialization of U.S. expendable boosters do not economically justify the start now. The next decade will justify construction of the fifth orbiter. The U.S. Air Force also wants to refurbish about 50 of its deactivated Titan 2 missiles and offer them for launches by government agencies.**

4. **National Air and Space Museum expansion and a new visitor's facility at KSC that would display large aircraft adjacent to the Dulles International Airport. The proposed facility would house a space shuttle, a Concorde SST, the Boeing 367-80 prototype for the 707, and a Flyable B-17.**

---

**Aug. 13, 1985 (Tuesday morn.): Dark-sky site: Why not combine the Perseid meteor shower with Comet Halley? The shower peaks that morning. The comet, at mag. 13 and 50 deg. from the sun, rises at about 2 AM, one hour before the 11x 11° cresent moon. This will be the first chance for many amateurs to observe the comet.**

**Sept. 14-15, 1985 (Sat/Sun): Dark-sky site: The comet should rise about midnight and be mag. 12 and 77 deg. from the sun. The moon is new this weekend - a good time to get the club out for some Jupiter, deep-sky and comet observing, as Comet Giacobin-Zinner will be mag. 8 and two degrees from Halley's.**

**Oct. 9-10, 1985 (Sat. even.): Public Session: The comet now rises about 10 PM and is 104 deg from the sun, at mag. 10.5. The reason we pick a weekenight is that the Draconids meteors peak this evening: this shower is associated with comet Giacobin-Zinner. If the comet passes our particular location in its orbit, this could be a very strong shower. The moon won't interfere either, rising about 3 AM.**

**Nov. 16 (Sat. Even.): Public Session: The comet now rises well after sunset, and Halley's will be up all night at mag. 7-8, and three degress south of the Pleiades. It should display an short tail. PThe Planet Jupiter (settling), the moon, Pleiades and Halley's comet should all be impressive to the general public.**

**Dec. 7-14, 1985 (Sat-Sun): Public and/or deep-sky sites: Take your telescope or binoculars to Christmas Parties or shopping centers as people will be in and about while Halley's Comet will be mag. 5 and high in the evening sky. Clubs may also wish to travel to dark sites in the area to try observing and taking simple tripod photography shots. The weather may be a problem during these months, though.**

**Jan. 11, 1986 (Sat even.): Public and/or dark-sky sites: Nearing our last chance for pre-perihelion observations of the comet, now at mag. 4.5 and high in the west in the evening sky. The moon would have been new on Jan. 10, marking it's been out of the evening sky since Dec. 30.**

**March 8, 1986 (Sat. morn.): Public and/or dark-sky sites: The comet is now in the southern sky, at mag 2 and in morning sky about 10 degrees. It's 44 deg from the sun and will hug the SE horizon for the next two month. The moon is new on Mar 10, meaning the comet will be in moonless sky until March 21. For a march 8-9 Messier Marathon the comet will be at fine triplet cluster may just north of the southern Horizon. For the Northern Hemisphere, the comet goes far south from late evening through mid-April.**

**April 24,1986 (Thurs. morn.): Public and/or dark-sky site: A total eclipse near 5 AM will be present a wonderful view with the comet, now at mag. 1 and in the morning sky. The comet will be about 50 deg. from the moon, however, and you may need binoculars to see it.**

**May 10, 1986 (Sat. even.): Public and/or dark-sky sites: Since the comet has already gone south, Americans will not be seeing it have wanted to see it have had their chance. public interest will wane during this time. The comet will be mag. 7 in the evening sky, 115 deg. from the sun.**

**June 7, 1986 (Sat. even.): Public and/or dark-sky site: With a new moon and the comet at mag. 9 and 85 deg. from the sun in the evening sky, this would be a good time to hold a summer's night star party.**

**During the next few months and years, Halley's comet will continue to dim as it sinks into the southern sky. We have heard some suggestions for public showings and astronomy club comet parties for Halley's comet. Now it's up to you to work out those minor details.**

=== PAGE 5 ===
# THE SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATIONS

# 5TH ANNUAL

# ASTRONOMICAL AUCTION

## SATURDAY MAY 4 11TH
## 6:00 PM
## DOORS WILL OPEN AT 2:00 PM

THE LOS GATOS RED CROSS BUILDING
16011 Los Gatos Saratoga Road

TELESCOPES, EYEPIECES, MOUNTINGS, MIRRORS, LENSES, CLOCK DRIVES, BOOKS, CAMERA EQUIPMENT, STAR CHARTS, FINDERS, TUBES, DIAGONALS, PHOTOGRAPHS, SPACE ART - everything you need to make your hobby more enjoyable. You name it - it's likely to be there. Check your garage and closets for anything astronomical you would like to sell. Complete the pre-registration information form on back and save time and toruble. Anyone can buy and sell! It's fun and it's easy!

SEE YOU AT ONE OF THE BIGGEST AND MOST FUN ASTRONOMICAL EVENTS IN THE BAY AREA!

=== PAGE 6 ===
# PRE-REGISTRATION INFORMATION

The 5th Annual Bay Area Astronomical Auction is approaching so now is the time to start looking around for those items not earning their space, or brought back from Riverside, or whatever is astronomical or telescope-making related that you would like to earn some $$ from.

Pre-registration by mail makes it easy. Fill out the form or a copy of it. List each different item you have. If you have several identical items, use a single line and put in the quantity. Give a minimum price, even if you are willing to let it go really cheap. Indicate the percentage of the selling price to go to the SJAA (minimum 10%). If you didn't pay much for it anyway you may wish to make it an outright donation. Thank you. All proceeds from the auction go to further public education in astronomy.

Next, and MOST important, mail the form, with a SASE, to Jim van Nuland, 3509 Calico Ave, San Jose, CA. 95124. You might keep a copy of it, too. Jim will assign your bidder/seller and item numbers, and will get the form back to you quickly. That's a promise.

You will then have the numbers to label everything before the day of the auction. Use stickers given to indicate the item number, at least. If you have large stickers sent back, include the minimum bid, too. It helps the auctioneer work smoother.

If you find another box of things, just send in another form. Include the bidder number from the first one. If you find more of something you'd already registered, give the number of the first, indicate the number to be added, and give the same description.

If you don't include the SASE, Jim will assign the numbers and hold the form. You can pick it up when you arrive at the auction and then get busy labeling your goodies then.

In any case, Jim will have all the stuff hammered into the computer before auction day, so there will be no backlog and, for those who pre-register, no delays. Priority on auction day will be given to assigning bidder numbers, ---item registration will be done as time permits. So get the forms to Jim.

## Directions to the auction:

Take Hwy 17 south towards Santa Cruz. Take the Highway 9 (Los Gatos-Saratoga Rd) exit and continue onto Los Gatos-Saratoga Rd. Travel about a mile to Rose Avenue and turn right. Turn right immediately into the Red Cross buildings parking lot. (16011 Los Gatos-Saratoga Rd). Plenty of parking and easy loading and unloading access!

Doors open at 2 PM for registration of items and bidders. There will be no item registration past 5:45 PM. Auction starts promptly at 6 PM. Items may be paid by cash or check. There will be a $1 bidder/seller registration fee at the door. Refreshments will be available!

---

## 1985 SJAA Auction Pre-Registration

| Bidder<br>#_____ | Name<br>Addr | | Club<br>City | Zip |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Item<br>NUM | Qty | Min<br>bid | SJAA<br>% | Description (about 40-50 characters or so...) |
| | | | | |
| | | | | |
| | | | | |
| | | | | |
| | | | | |

=== PAGE 7 ===
# FREMONT PEAK OBSERVATORY ASSOCIATION

The *Fremont Peak Observatory Association* was founded in September, 1984, by a small group of active San Francisco Bay Area amateur astronomers and telescope makers. Our goal is to build, equip, and operate an observatory at Fremont Peak State Park, located east of Salinas, California, in the Gavilan Mountain Range.

Fremont Peak State Park has long been a favorite dark sky observing site of Bay Area amateur astronomers. Situated little more than one hour's drive south of San Jose, the park offers easy access to camping and observing sites at approximately 3000 feet elevation. Daytime activities include short hikes to the top of Fremont Peak for spectacular views, family picnicing, and for those willing to drive the ten miles into San Juan Bautista a chance to explore one of California's historical mission towns. San Juan Bautista also offers overnight lodging, shops, and several excellent restaurants.

The *Fremont Peak Observatory Association* is a non-profit group dedicated to promoting the astronomical interests the park has to offer. Currently we are working with the California State Park Department to formulate an acceptable plan for the construction of the observatory facilities. Our Articles of Incorporation and By-Laws have been filed with the State of California and we are currently waiting final approval of our tax-exempt status. The California Park System has been very enthusiastic and supportive of our ideas and goals and is doing everything it can to expedite the documentation involved.

The observatory we are planning will house a 30 inch and a 22 inch telescope. Both telescopes are currently under construction with expected completion dates of Sepetember 1985 and October 1985 respectively. These instruments will be among the largest available to the public and amateur astronomers on a regular basis. Public programs will be offered during the good weather months of May through October, with private use of the instruments scheduled--around the public programs on a year-long basis.

The association is now open for membership. We need to raise roughly $8,000.00 to build the structure to house the telescopes. Approximately $1,000.00 has already been collected. Halley's Comet is coming, and we can't think of a better way to learn about and view this once-in-a-lifetime event. We need your ideas, suggestions, and contributions to make Fremont Peak Observatory a reality. Full membership descriptions and an application are located on the back. Thank you.

=== PAGE 8 ===
# All classes of membership are entitled to the following privileges:

- Full use of the telescopes and facilities (after initial instrument orientation session)
- Quarterly newsletter informing you of astronomical events happening at the observatory and around Northern California
- Membership Card
- Voting at general meetings (if non-Corporate) after one year of membership
- Opportunities to assist during the open public viewing evenings

All memberships are non-voting the first year. Corporate membership is non-voting. Up through December, 1985, all Sustaining, Life, and Corporate members will receive a parchment declaring them Charter Members in the *Fremont Peak Observatory Association*. All General, Family, and Contributing memberships will have "Charter Member" noted on their membership cards.

All memberships except Life and Corporate are subject to a one-time $10.00 initiation fee, payable at the time of application for membership. All initiation fees, membership dues, and donations made to the *Fremont Peak Observatory Association* are tax-deductible.

Please send your check or money order, made payable to the *Fremont Peak Observatory Association*, to:

> Frank Dibbell
> Membership Chairperson, FPOA
> 710 Georgia Avenue
> Sunnyvale, CA 94086

---

# Application For Membership

Name: _______________________________________________________________

Address: ______________________________________________________________

State: ________________     Zip: ____________________

Please enter me as a member in the *Fremont Peak Observatory Association* under the following category:

| General | ____$10.00/yr* |
| Family (two or more at same address) | ____$10.00/yr* |
| Contributing | ____$30.00/yr* |
| Sustaining | ____$50.00/yr* |
| Life | ____$200.00 |
| Corporate | ____$50.00/yr |

\* Plus one-time initiation fee of $10.00

Please find enclosed a check or money order for: __________

=== PAGE 9 ===
# THE SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION

## GENERAL MEETINGS:

**General Meetings are held once a month at the Los Gatos Red Cross building.** Los Gatos California. This is also the location for the SJAA's indoor star parties. The building is located at 18001 LOS Gatos-Saratoga Rd., on the right just past Roberts Rd., going towards (Saratoga) exit and continue up Los Gatos-Saratoga road for about 1.5 miles. Turn right at Rose Ave. and turn right immediately into the parking lot of the Red Cross Building. **MEETINGS BEGIN AT 8 PM.**

## FREMONT PEAK STATE PARK:

Take hwy 101 south towards Salinas. Take Hwy 156 east (San Juan Bautista) for two miles to a yellow flashing light. Turn right and go about 25 miles to where road curves slightly to the left and splits. Stay left for about 200 ft. then bear to the right on San Juan Rd. again. Follow road or about 11 miles up into the park. SJAA sets up at Coulter Camp overflow area. It's visible as you drive up into the main area of camp. Parking lights only after dark, please.

[DIAGRAM: Map showing route to Los Gatos-Saratoga Rd with landmarks]

[DIAGRAM: Map showing Fremont Peak area with Coulter Camp and Salinas route]

## GRANT RANCH COUNTY PARK:

This site is a new one for the SJAA so come and try it out. Located on Mt. Hamilton Rd. half way between San Jose and the Observatory, go east on Mt. Hamilton Road, take Mt. (in either direction) to Alum Rock Rd. Go east up Alum Rock Road to Mt. Hamilton Road and follow it. Grant ranch is just past the Quimby road intersection. After sunset the park front gate will be locked with a combination. The gate combination is posted 4565 to open. But be sure to lock the gate behind you, coming or going. There are two gates, the lock may be on the exit gate. If so enter the park from this gate.

[DIAGRAM: Map showing Grant Ranch area with Mt. Hamilton Rd and routes]

## HENRY COE STATE PARK:

Take Hwy 101 south towards Gilroy and take the East Dunne exit. Continue east towards the hills (past Anderson lake), and go another 12 miles to the top. Past the park entrance you will see the Astronomical Club sign on the right by a horse trough. The gate is locked but the Club combination, is 4565. Always lock the gate after yourself, if arriving after dark pick up your card on the outside and hike in first to find an observing site before driving in. Parking lights only after dark, please.

[DIAGRAM: Map showing Henry Coe Park area with Anderson Reservoir and East Dunne Exit]

## EPHEMERIS is published monthly by the San Jose Astronomical Association, 3905 Calico Ave., San Jose, CA. 95124

### OFFICERS:

**PRESIDENT** Robert Fingerhut, 340 Rio Verde Pl. #4 Milpitas, CA. 95035 (408) 263-4455

**VICE-PRES** Dave Ambrose 818 Everett St., El Cerrito, CA 94530 (415) 524-0860

**Sec.** James Van Nuland, 3509 Calico Ave. San Jose, CA 95124 (408) 371-1307

**TREAS.** Robert Fingerhut, 340 Rio Verde Pl. #4 Milpitas, CA. 95035 (408) 263-4455

### BOARD OF DIRECTORS:

Paul Mancuso (408) 946-0738, Steve Greenberg (415) 443-6838, Tom Ahl (408) 997-1383, Gene Cisneros (408) 923-6800, Joe Sunseri (408) 244-9699, Chris Pratt (408) 629-4455

### EPHEMERIS EDITOR:

John P. Gleason, 5361 Port Sailwood Dr., Newark, CA. 94560 (415) 790-9250

## CLUB TELESCOPES

The SJAA maintains three loaner scopes for the use by its members. Loan periods are two months, and all arrangements must be made between the person wanting to borrow the scope and the person having it. If your two months are up and no one has indicated an interest in borrowing the telescope at the end of your time, then you should contact someone asked is that a board member or bulletin editor be notified when a telescope changes hands.

## CONCERNING WANT ADS:

All SJAA members and friends may place astronomical related ads in the Ephemeris free of charge. All ads will appear for two months unless the editor is notified otherwise. Please submit by sending to Ephemeris, 5361 Port Sailwood Dr., Newark, CA. 94560

=== PAGE 10 ===
# SAN JOSE ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION

**MEMBERSHIP ONLY: $8.00    MEMBERSHIP/S&T: $21.00    JUNIOR (UNDER 18): $15.00**

Name ____________________________________________

Address __________________________________________

_________________________________________________

Telephone (______) _______________________________

Please bring this form to any SJAA meeting, or send to:
Robert Fingerhut, Treas.
San Jose Astronomical Association
340 Rio Verde Pl. #4, Milpitas, CA 95035

[Phone: (408) 263-4455]

Membership: Adult ____ Junior (under 18) ____
*Bulletin* Subscription only: ____

## Questionnaire (optional)

What are your astronomical interests (e.g. astro-photography, deep-sky observation, telescope making, etc.)? ___________________________________________

_________________________________________________

_________________________________________________

_________________________________________________

Do you own a telescope? __________ If so, what kind?

_________________________________________________

Is there any specific area of astronomy that you feel qualified to help others with? _____________________

_________________________________________________

_________________________________________________

---

*SJAA EPHEMERIS*
*3509 CALICO AVE*
*SAN JOSE, CA 95124*

**BULK RATE**
**U.S. POSTAGE PAID**
**PERMIT NO. 5381**
**SAN JOSE, CA. 95125**

---

*TIME VALUE—DATED*
*NEWS MATERIAL*