=== PAGE 1 ===
# SAN JOSE AMATEUR ASTRONOMERS, INC.
## MONTHLY BULLETIN
### DECEMBER, 1971

PRES: Dave Erickson 269-4833
VICE-PRES: Tom Halliday 296-3169

SECR: Jerry Rattley 262-5350
TRES: Emmet Murphy 297-6378

MORRISON LECTURE     MORRISON LECTURE     MORRISON LECTURE

MORRISON LECTURE          MORRISON LECTURE

## DECEMBER 8, 8 p.m.

In place of the December meeting will be the Morrison Lecture presented to us this year by Dr. David Cudaback from the University of California Astronomy Department at Berkeley. His topic will be "High Altitude Astronomy", and it is certainly hoped that he will be well received as Dr. Donald Goldsmith was last year. Difficulty has been encountered in obtaining the planetarium afterwards, so a star party has been planned for afterwards, SO BRING YOUR TELESCOPES AND BINOCULARS!

If weather permits, Dave will announce to the public attending that an informal star party will take place following the lecture. The lecture will take place at West Valley College, Saratoga Campus, at Fruitvale Avenue, Room SS135 across from the planetarium.

The purpose of the Morrison Lecture fund is to provide public lectures, sponsored jointly by the Astronomical Society of the Pacific and a local astronomical group. In this case as the local astronomical group, the San Jose Amateur Astronomers are responsible for publicizing the lecture as widely as possible. Attached to this bulletin are two leaflets that you are to post in a public place or hand to your friends Above all BE THERE YOURSELF!

## PLANNING MEETING, DECEMBER 10, 8 p.m.

Meet at Dave Ambrose's home, 1758 El Codo Way, San Jose. Phone 269-8262 for directions. Most remaining winter events will be planned at that time.

## STAR PARTY, DECEMBER 18 AT SJAA SITE

Contact Dave at 269-4833 for details concerning this winter star party. Some of the best viewing all last year was done during the winter months.

## REGULAR MEETING, JANUARY 7, 8 p.m.

The January regular meeting will be at Community Bank. Talks to be given will be "Double Stars in General" by Jerry Rattley and "Pluto" by Greg Nichols.

=== PAGE 2 ===
# "CALENDAR OF ROCK"
## contributed by Ralph Bridge

S

Stonehenge, southwest England's enigmatic pile of primitive hanging stones, hid its mysterious past for over 3000 years.

The services of a modern electronic computer were used to solve the mystery of Stonehenge. The mystery: What was Stonehenge used for? The answer: It was an accurate "Astronomical Observatory" built to observe and mark the key rising and setting points of the sun and moon. Most of this work was done by Dr. Gerald Hawkins of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory.

This activity also made it an accurate calendar to determine what season the country was in, a necessary knowledge for agriculture. Also, Stonehenge was a tool for predicting eclipses of the sun and moon, a necessary knowledge for priestly ritual.

It was first thought to have been built by the Druids for Druid ritual, but that was false; its present state of construction was completed about 1200 years before the druids appeared in England, about 1800 years before the Romans appeared. No written records have been found stating who built it or when it was built. Dating was done by carbon 14 testing of charcoal and antlers and bone of deer found in the holes of Stonehenge.

The two solstice and the equinox rise and set points of the sun are accurately marked by stones or holes in line to view across the top to the extreme points, making seven sun viewing lines, marking six points. There are ten moon viewing lines marking twelve moon rise and set points. A total of 18 extreme celestial positions accurately are marked; this is "beyond accident" say the professional astronomers.

Science writer Alexander Marshack states, "There should be a re-evaluation of the origins of human culture, including the origins of art, symbol, religion, rite and astronomy, and of the skills available for the beginnings of agriculture."

A priest of ancient Stonehenge times might say something like this, "The full-moon god rises over the heel-stone tonight just before the sun-god sets; tonight the shadow eats up the moon-god; get out ye simple serfs, fall on yer faces and pray for the return of the god-of-the-night."

=== PAGE 3 ===
# ORBITS OF VISUAL BINARY ST Elements 2        contributed by Jerry Hatiley

Elements of orbits from the Third Catalogue of Orbits of Visual Binary stars
star name    1958 pos    P    T    no    a    i    ω    Ω    Ω 1-y MEMO    date
               in  d·e    yrs         "    o    o    o

ξ  2 Cas 00 03 479 25  500 1888 .57  0.69 113  230 170 326  W.D.Heintz  1971
ε  13 Cep 00 13 176 40 1600 1820 .50  1.26 136  304  81 408  W.D.Heintz  1960
0ʹʹ  6 Cep 00 19 165 44  240 1927 .80  0.46 103  184 147 466  P.Muller    1954
    λ Cas 00 29 154 15  640 1958 .00  0.59  48    0 174 466  W.D.Heintz  1965
   .2 Tuc 00 29 -63 14   44 1928 .80  0.39 142  282  40 148  O.J.Eggen   1965

Struv·2 (ADS 1021) located 14 high in Cassiopeia, the component
magnitude of this system are 6.9 and 7.1, and the spectra of the
system is A3. The motion is retrograde, with the distance in-
creasing to 1102 in 2002. Apastron passage reached in 2002.

Struv·13 (ADS 207); about 2º below ξ2, this binary is a bit
easier than 32. Motion is retrograde, with the distance slowly
increasing. There will b· no maximum in the near future.
Component magnitudes are 6.9 and 7.1, and the system spectra
is B9.

Otta struv.6 (ADS 298); about 10º below ξ13, this binary
also has retrograde motion and the distance is currently
rising to a maximum of 0"82 in 2050. Apastron passage
will also occur in 2050. Component magnitudes are 7.4 and
8.4, and the spectra are B8 and A1 respectively. This
system is a physical triple with a 10.2 mgb star at 14"
sharing common proper motion. The AB-C system is known as
Struv·26, ξ26.

## Ephemerid·s:

         ξ 2         ξ 13        0ʹʹ 6       λ Cas
1971    24º 0"56    60º 0"84    153º 0"54    179º 0"59
1980    19  0.65    57  0.85    152  0.62    182  0.58
1990    15  0.73    54  0.66    151  0.69    186  0.58
2000    12  0.78    61  0.86    160  0.74    190  0.57

Lambda Cassiopian (ADe 454); located 2º below and pr-
ceding Alpha, this binary has components of magnitudes 5.5
and 5.8, with a system spectra of B8. In this system the
motion is directed and the distance is decreasing to a minimum
of 0"4 in 2119. A maximum of 0"6 was just passed in 1959,
and the next maximum of 0"6 is not due until 2278. Alpha
Cassiopiæ itself is an optical double with a superb color
contrast that is listed in neither the Skalnate Pleso nor
Norton's. The components of Alpha have magnitudes of 2.5
and 9, P.A.280º, sep.66", colors orange and blue, respectively.

Beta Tucanae (I 280); located too far south for observation,
but if you are over down south do not pass this stellar system
by. It is part of a sextuple system composed of A1, A², &βº
each of which is again double. Data on this system can be
found in the Skalnatz Pliso. The Ephimeride below goes
through almost a full revolution, apastron passage in 1950,
maximum in 1991, minimum and periastron in 2012.

1971    20 0"22    1985 2070 0"53    2000  276º 0"50
1975  333  0.36    1990  296  0.57    2005  261  0.41
1980  217  0.47    1995  285  0.55    2012  116  0.07

=== PAGE 4 ===
# SAN JOSE AMATEUR ASTRONOMERS

announce another

# MORRISON LECTURE

sponsored by the

Astronomical Society of the Pacific

**LECTURER:** Dr. David Cudaback  
Astronomy Department  
University of California, Berkeley

**TOPIC:** HIGH ALTITUDE ASTRONOMY

**PLACE:** West Valley College  
Saratoga Campus, Fruitvale Avenue  
Room SS135

**TIME & DATE:** December 3rd, Friday evening, 8 p.m.

Public invited, no admission charge.